Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell on Dec. 14 said there was not enough recent data for the central bank to change its outlook for inflation yet. (Video: Reuters)

Listen Comment on this story Comment Gift Article Share

The Federal Reserve raised interest rates by half a percentage point Wednesday and signaled plans to keep raising them more in 2023, capping off one of the most aggressive years in the central bank’s history and marking a new phase in its fight against inflation. Wp Get the full experience. Choose your plan ArrowRight But even though the economy is much different now from what it was a year ago, the Fed enters 2023 with as much uncertainty as it had last December. How much pain is ahead for families and businesses remains to be seen.

“I don’t think anyone knows whether we’re going to have a recession or not,” Fed Chair Jerome H. Powell said at a news conference. “And if we do, whether it’s going to be a deep one or not — it’s just not knowable.”

Despite the risk, the Fed is on track to hike rates past 5 percent next year, according to projections released at the end of the central bank’s two-day policy meeting. Those estimates show officials expect to add three-quarters of a percentage point onto their base policy rate, though neither the projections nor Powell said whether that would take place over three more meetings (with hikes of 0.25 percentage points each) or two (with hikes of 0.50 and 0.25 percentage points). Rate cuts could come in 2024.

Advertisement

Officials clearly expect the economy to slow as they hold rates high. Growth is expected to eke out at 0.5 percent next year, and the labor market is expected to soften, with the central bank forecasting the unemployment rate to reach 4.6 percent at the end of 2023. Inflation is expected to end 2022 at 5.6 percent, using the Fed’s preferred gauge, before falling to 3.1 percent next year.

An interest rate hike will affect anyone with a home mortgage, car loan, savings account or money in the stock market. (Video: Daron Taylor/The Washington Post)

After more than a year of dashed hopes, the inflation picture is finally looking more encouraging. Prices have cooled more than expected over the past two months, giving families and policymakers newfound optimism that higher rates are working. But Powell made clear that “historical experience cautions against prematurely loosening policy.” Successfully controlling the current bout of inflation also means keeping it from reemerging in the future.

“The inflation data received so far for October and November show a welcome reduction in the monthly pace of price increases,” Powell told reporters after the meeting. “But it will take substantially more evidence to give confidence that inflation is on a sustained downward path.”

Advertisement

The markets’ reaction was mixed. Stocks initially fell on the news that more rate hikes are still to come, then rallied a bit later in the afternoon. But at Wednesday’s close, the Dow Jones industrial average was down roughly 140 points, or 0.4 percent. The S&P 500 fell 0.6 percent and the Nasdaq 0.76 percent.

Julia Coronado, founder of MacroPolicy Perspectives and a former Fed economist, said Powell tried to cement the markets’ expectation that the Fed still has a ways to go, even on the heels of encouraging inflation news. The Fed’s most powerful tool rests in interest rates, but the central bank relies on the financial system to amplify its moves, keep financial conditions tight and price in additional hikes.

“He’s not thrilled about markets getting happy about the end of rate hikes,” Coronado said. “He wants conditions to stay tight, because that’s the mechanism that’s going to help cool the economy and inflation.” The Fed, she added, “is trying to really emphasize: ‘Don’t get too happy too early, or things won’t work out. If we all want the soft landing, work with us here.’”

Advertisement

If the past year is any guide, the Fed’s plans for further hikes could change significantly. Powell said that estimates for future rates are “our best assessment today of what we think the peak rate will be,” but he acknowledged how consistently those projections have been scrapped and rewritten.

The Fed has now hoisted rates seven times this year and signaled a few more hikes early next year. To control the highest inflation in decades, central bankers have been on a tear, raising their base policy rate from zero to more than 4 percent. The dramatic actions are the result of a year when inflation repeatedly bucked the Fed’s expectations, climbing this summer to 9.1 percent and leaving officials scrambling to keep up.

Now, the Fed’s top policymakers face a different challenge. For most of 2022, they were trying to move quickly, and in big swings, to get interest rates into “restrictive territory” that would slow the economy. But 2023 will raise other questions about how much higher rates go and how long the central bank will hold borrowing costs high.

Advertisement

“The strong view on the committee is that we’ll need to stay there until we’re really confident that inflation is coming down in a sustained way,” Powell said. “And we think that will be some time.”

Wednesday’s move brings the federal funds rate to between 4.25 and 4.5 percent. Rate hikes operate with a lag, and the full force of the Fed’s decisions won’t seize the economy — or cause a recession — for months to come.

Powell continued to maintain that a recession is not inevitable. He said growth should still remain positive next year, even if “it’s not going to feel like a boom.”

Peter Boockvar, chief investment officer at Bleakley Financial Group, said that “just because they’re close to being done with raising rates doesn’t mean they’re anywhere close to transitioning off that terminal level.”

Advertisement

For months, financial markets have flown high and sunk low on Fed policy. In November, when Powell signaled that the bank would start to ease up on rate hikes at this meeting, stock markets rejoiced, and they rose on Tuesday after the release of an encouraging inflation report. But Wall Street is still jittery, since the Fed has made clear that taming the worst inflation in decades will involve pain for businesses and households.

The Fed’s actions in 2022 packed a punch. The central bank hiked rates in March for the first time since the pandemic began, moving by a modest quarter of a percentage point. When officials met again in May, they opted for a stronger increase of half a percentage point. Then they went further, hiking rates four consecutive times between June and November by a whopping three-quarters of a percentage point each, moving so forcefully that Fed watchers began criticizing the moves as overkill.

Powell maintains that the economy can still avoid a recession, especially under a scenario in which the labor market comes back into sync and employers nix millions of vacant positions, rather than laying off already employed people. So far, the labor market is still growing, and layoffs have been limited to smaller pockets of the economy. Crucially, consumer spending is keeping up despite high inflation and uncertainty about the future.

But not even the experts can guarantee what’s to come. Powell and his colleagues concede that inflation, broken supply chains and the economy’s reemergence from the pandemic have repeatedly bested Fed models. And all year, Fed officials scratched out their forecasts to downgrade expectations for the labor market, economic growth and inflation. Only time will tell whether they get 2023 right.

“We’ll continue to make forecasts, but we’re going to have to be humble and skeptical about forecasts, I think, for some time,” Powell said last month at the Brookings Institution. “And that calls for a lot of risk management.”

GiftOutline Gift Article