Democrats know how to get votes. Whether it’s hosting Democrat voter drives (at federal government offices), knocking door-to-door to harvest (and cure) ballots, or asking billionaires to fund their GOTV efforts (see Sam Bankman-Fried, Mark Zuckerberg), Democrats have electioneering — winning — down to a science. Part of their strategy is knowing which demographics to target. Minorities, suburban women, and young people typically fit the bill. Case in point: Gen Z came out strong for Democrats this past election cycle, and will be a reliable voting bloc for Democrats for the foreseeable future. But Democrats are now looking to expand the youth vote, and they can do it by lowering the voting age.

Generation Citizen (GC), a nonprofit funded by the leftist Foundation for Civic Leadership, has a national campaign to lower the federal voting age to 16. GC argues that expanding the vote to 16-year-olds will “drive demand for better civic education in schools,” which is laughable, considering a third of high school seniors lack a simple understanding of civics. And that’s not changing anytime soon as public schools are starting to resemble propaganda mills.

GC points to two cities that have expanded voting to 16- and 17-year-olds as models for their campaign: Takoma Park and Hyattsville, Maryland. What GC fails to mention is that both of these cities are suburbs of ultra-blue Washington, D.C., and heavily left-leaning. Tacoma Park is called “the Berkeley of the East” for good reason. So, of course expanding the vote to ultra-leftist high schoolers in ultra-leftist areas was a “success” (for Democrats)!

After two-thirds of young voters backed Democrat House candidates in the 2022 midterms (and 27 percent of Americans between the ages of 18 and 29 cast ballots), Democrats are doing everything they can to capitalize on the youth vote, including adding mindless, Zoomer high-schoolers to their ranks. This is why there are countless leftist nonprofits dedicated to increasing the youth vote.

“If you change who can vote, you can change the outcome of elections,” executive director of the Honest Elections Project Jason Snead told The Federalist. “This is something the left’s been pushing for quite a while — along with enfranchising noncitizens and automatic restoration of felon voting rights. They’re always looking for new people to bring into the election system and calculating the targeted groups who will be more likely to vote Democratic.”

Back in 2021, a majority of House Democrats voted to decrease the federal voting age to 16 as part of an amendment to their disastrous “voting rights” bill. Luckily, the amendment failed.

Despite Democrats’ attempts to lower the voting age, the issue remains deeply unpopular among the American electorate. A Hill/Harris-X poll from 2019 shows 84 percent of registered voters opposed allowing 16-year-olds to vote.

“We have this idea in a democracy that people should elect their government,” Snead said. “But the left is trying to have the government choose its people, and that is the antithesis of a transparent and accountable government.”

Victoria Marshall is a staff writer at The Federalist. Her writing has been featured in the New York Post, National Review, and Townhall. She graduated from Hillsdale College in May 2021 with a major in politics and a minor in journalism. Follow her on Twitter @vemrshll.