Image Credit C-SPAN/Screenshot

Texas Republicans in the U.S. House of Representatives unveiled their legislative framework for fixing President Joe Biden’s crisis at the southern border on Thursday while blasting the Democrat commander-in-chief for failing to address the ongoing disaster.

Spearheaded by Rep. Chip Roy, the outline includes several policies aimed at stymying the mass influx of illegal immigration at the southern border. Among the key tenets of the agenda are plans to complete physical border infrastructure, as well as rectify existing enforcement policies neglected by the Biden administration. Cracking down on cartels and criminal organizations is also a core component, according to the delegation.

“With this new Republican majority in the House, our Texas delegation is committed to using every tool and authority at our disposal to hold President Biden, Secretary [Alejandro] Mayorkas, and this entire administration accountable for their dereliction of duty,” said Rep. Jodey Arrington.

Since taking office, Biden has revoked seemingly every policy imaginable that would permit Customs and Border Protection (CBP) officials to effectively secure the U.S.-Mexico border. In June 2021, the administration announced it would be formally ending the Trump-era “Remain in Mexico” policy, which required illegal immigrants seeking asylum to stay in the Latin American country until their court hearing.

More recently, the administration has been fighting in court to eliminate Title 42, a health policy also established under the Trump administration that allows federal officials to expel illegal immigrants with minimal processing.

As a result of such policy changes, the number of illegal crossings along the southern border has exploded over the past two years. In October alone, CBP apprehended more than 230,000 illegals attempting to cross the border, not including the estimated 64,000 “gotaways” who evaded capture. In fiscal year 2022, CBP reported an astonishing 2.3 million apprehensions, compared to the 1.7 million reported in 2021.

Throughout their press conference, Texas Republicans also made it a point to emphasize the dangers an open border poses to both Americans and migrants, with Roy highlighting the ongoing travesty of human and sex trafficking.

“Little girls [and] little boys [are] being sold into the sex trafficking trade. In what world is this somehow compassionate?” he said. “This is destroying lives. [It’s] destroying American lives.”

Try as his administration might to skirt the reality at the border, Biden’s willful incompetence is indeed costing lives. Just this week, CBP announced that one of its agents died at 1 a.m. on Wednesday after suffering injuries during a pursuit of illegal immigrants on an all-terrain vehicle. The death came less than 24 hours after Biden told a group of reporters he hasn’t visited the border because “there are more important things going on.”

When opening the forum to questions from the press, a member of the corporate media unsurprisingly asked the GOP delegation if any of the representatives supported giving amnesty to illegal aliens brought to the U.S. as minors (recipients of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program). In a masterclass performance on how to deal with left-wing activists posing as journalists, Rep. Mayra Flores threw the question back at the media, asking why they haven’t pressed Democrats about their lack of action on the issue.

“Y’all have had the president and the majority [in Congress], why don’t you ask them [about DACA]?” Flores asked. “Y’all keep using this issue with Hispanics just to get our support, just to get our vote. … Go and ask [Democrats] why they haven’t done anything.”

Shawn Fleetwood is a Staff Writer for The Federalist and a graduate of the University of Mary Washington. He also serves as a state content writer for Convention of States Action and his work has been featured in numerous outlets, including RealClearPolitics, RealClearHealth, and Conservative Review. Follow him on Twitter @ShawnFleetwood