Image Credit KPRC 2 Click2Houston/YouTube

After the FBI interfered in the 2016 presidential election through Russia hoaxing and the 2020 presidential election by suppressing the legitimate Hunter Biden laptop story, it looks like the notoriously corrupt federal agency is election meddling again ahead of the 2022 midterms. An FBI whistleblower alleged in a leaked document that the FBI lists “misinformation” as a potential “election crime,” Project Veritas reported on Thursday.

The document, titled “2022 Midterm Elections Social Media Analysis Cheat Sheet,” also lists “disinformation” as a potential election crime, describing it as “false or inaccurate information intended to mislead others,” including “Disinformation campaigns on social media,” which it describes as something “used to deliberately confuse, trick, or upset the public.”

BREAKING: From Project Veritas! FBI Whistleblower Leaks Document Showing Agency Targeting ‘Misinformation’ Under ‘Election Crimes’ Ahead of 2022 Midterm Elections!! pic.twitter.com/AXezUKLPzb — Harmeet K. Dhillon (@pnjaban) October 27, 2022

The news indicates the FBI is yet again meddling in our elections because, as Americans learned through the 2020 presidential race, the bureau’s definition of “disinformation” and “misinformation” is simply information that could harm Democrats’ electoral prospects.

For instance, Mark Zuckerberg revealed in August that the FBI interfered in the 2020 election by directing Facebook (and likely other platforms) to censor so-called “disinformation,” which included the Hunter Biden laptop story. The New York Post’s bombshell story on President Joe Biden’s son was subsequently smeared by Democrats, Big Tech, the corporate media, and the feds as Russian “disinformation.”

The story was entirely real, however, and it appears Hunter made potentially criminal business deals in Chinese and Ukraine by leveraging his father’s position and connections, implicating the Democrats’ then-presidential candidate Joe Biden as compromised by American adversaries. To protect Joe Biden, the FBI and its partners in Big Tech and the corporate media waged one of the biggest coordinated censorship campaigns in modern American political history to squash the Hunter laptop story — much of which was already “verified or verifiable.” As The Federalist’s Senior Legal Correspondent Margot Cleveland reported about a different FBI whistleblower report made to Sen. Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa, earlier this year:

[T]he whistleblowers alleged that Washington Field Office Assistant Special Agent in Charge Timothy ‘Thibault and other FBI officials sought to falsely portray as disinformation evidence acquired from multiple sources that provided the FBI derogatory information related to Hunter Biden’s financial and foreign business activities, even though some of that information had already been or could be verified.’ The Iowa senator claimed that ‘Thibault also reportedly ordered the closure of a stream of information related to Hunter Biden and sought to improperly mark the matter within FBI systems in a way that would prevent it from being re-opened in the future.’ ‘The FBI headquarters team allegedly claimed that reporting from the stream was at risk of disinformation,’ but the whistleblowers told Grassley, ‘that all of the information obtained through that stream was already verified or verifiable.’

Surveys show that 1 in 6 Biden voters would have changed their minds if they had known about the censored news stories that were unfavorable to Biden, including the laptop story. In throttling the bombshell, the FBI and others meddled in the election and potentially tipped the scale in Biden’s favor.

Not only did the FBI interfere in the 2020 election, but when it became clear the Hunter Biden laptop story was legitimate, the agency also refused to do its job and seriously probe Hunter’s corrupt dealings over the last two years. Grassley demanded last week that the FBI and Department of Justice provide Congress with an unredacted brief with the steps the agencies have taken to investigate the Biden son, but the agency has not responded to the senator.

Under a section titled “Things to Consider,” in the latest leaked document, the FBI reminds agents that the First and Fourth Amendments still exist. What agents are supposed to do with that fact is unclear, though, since the FBI has shown little to no regard for the Constitution as of late. The suppression of the Hunter Biden laptop is just one of many examples.

Perhaps most egregious of all the instances of FBI corruption is its nearly decade-long political persecution of Donald Trump. During the 2016 election, the bureau conspired with Democrats to annihilate the campaign of then-candidate Trump. Once Trump was elected by the American people, the FBI tried to overthrow his presidency using falsified evidence and illegal tactics. The agency continues to target Trump today in an attempt to thwart his potential 2024 political aspirations.

The FBI has never expressed remorse for its election crimes or violations of Americans’ constitutional rights. Instead, the feds have been emboldened to continue their election-meddling practices by censoring information they deem inconvenient for Democrats, further solidifying the American people’s distrust in the Department of Justice.

Evita Duffy is a staff writer to The Federalist and the co-founder of the Chicago Thinker. She loves the Midwest, lumberjack sports, writing, and her family. Follow her on Twitter at @evitaduffy_1 or contact her at evita@thefederalist.com.