Listen Comment on this story Comment Gift Article Share

A jury on Wednesday convicted three men of aiding a plot to kidnap Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer (D) in a case that deepened fears about the spread of right-wing extremism and potential violence directed at politicians. Wp Get the full experience. Choose your plan ArrowRight The three men — Joseph Morrison, Paul Bellar and Pete Musico — were found guilty in Jackson County Circuit Court of providing material support for terrorist acts, possessing a firearm while committing a felony, and being members of a gang. They face up to 20 years in prison.

A jury on Oct. 26 convicted Joseph Morrison, Paul Bellar and Pete Musico for aiding a 2020 plot to kidnap Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer (D). (Video: Jackson County Circuit Court, Photo: J. Scott Park/AP/Jackson County Circuit Court)

Whitmer, who is running for reelection in November, has said that she considers the plot an attempt to kidnap and kill her.

“These verdicts are further proof that violence and threats have no place in our politics,” Whitmer said Wednesday on Twitter.

No threat, no plot, no rhetoric will break my belief in the goodness and decency of our people. And these verdicts are further proof that violence and threats have no place in our politics. — Governor Gretchen Whitmer (@GovWhitmer) October 26, 2022

More than a dozen people have been arrested in connection with the plot to kidnap Whitmer, which prosecutors said was fueled by anti-government extremism and anger at steps that the governor took to combat the coronavirus pandemic.

Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer (D) on Oct. 8, 2020, laid some blame on then-President Donald Trump for an alleged plot to kidnap her. (Video: The Washington Post)

In August, two other men, Adam Fox and Barry Croft Jr., were convicted on federal charges of plotting to kidnap Whitmer. Prosecutors said they planned to capture Whitmer at her vacation home, detonate a bridge and ignite an armed rebellion ahead of the 2020 presidential election.

Advertisement

In that trial, jurors heard recordings of Fox and Croft discussing their plans to abduct the governor and hang her for “treason.” Croft believed he had God’s permission to kill, an FBI agent testified.

Fox, Croft and the three men convicted Wednesday were members of the Wolverine Watchmen, a far-right paramilitary group that recruited members on Facebook and periodically met for firearm training in preparation for what they called the “boogaloo” — a violent uprising against the government.

Morrison was considered the group’s “commander,” while Bellar had the role of “sergeant,” prosecutors said. Musico is Morrison’s father-in-law, and the group’s “field training” exercises took place at their home in Jackson County.

The three men convicted Wednesday did not face federal charges and did not participate in physical surveillance of Whitmer’s vacation home, unlike others charged.

“This office will not sit idly by and watch while armed terrorists plan acts of civil unrest with the intent of causing mayhem and murder,” Dana Nessel (D), Michigan’s attorney general, said in a statement after the verdict.

“These are not merely acts of ‘harmless chatter’ and ‘wishful thinking,’ ” she said. “These are criminal conspiracies to conduct dangerous acts.”

GiftOutline Gift Article