A Canadian fashion company published an ad last month that had nothing to do with fashion. At the end of the advertisement, it turns out the star, 37-year-old Canadian Jennyfer Hatch, is dead.

“Last breaths are sacred. Even though as I seek help to end my life,” she says in the 30-second montage of her final days as if it’s a lucid dream. “With all the pain and in these final moments, there is still so much beauty.”

According to the National Post, a Candian newspaper popular west of Ontario, Hatch was terminally diagnosed with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, a rare and painful condition that compromises connective tissues. She turned to medical assistance in dying (MAID) after she failed to secure medical assistance in living.

“I feel like I’m falling through the cracks so if I’m not able to access health care am I then able to access death care? And that’s what led me to look into MAID,” she told CTV under a pseudonym last year. “It is far easier to let go than keep fighting.”

Canada is now expanding eligibility for assisted suicide, with corporate support. Sheila Gunn Reid, the editor-in-chief of the Canadian newspaper Rebel News, outlined on Fox News last month how Canada has been making it easier to kill people. Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau’s government, she said, removed the 10-day wait time between requests for medically assisted death and execution.

“And you don’t have to do it in writing, you can just ask the state to kill you,” Reid said. “And when we say ‘medical assistance in suicide,’ don’t think for a second that that means doctors participating in this. It doesn’t have to be your doctor. It can just be a medical professional. That might be a nurse that is seeing you today for the first time or even a pharmacist.”

This summer, the Canadian government reported more than 10,000 people died by assisted suicide in 2021. Next year, lawmakers are expanding eligibility for assisted suicide to the mentally ill. When the government legalized euthanasia in 2016, it was open only to patients with terminal conditions over 18 years old.

Peter Simons, the company CEO behind the “All is Beauty” campaign, said the company’s ad was about glorifying life and “hope and optimism.” Yeah, right. It was a promotion for people to kill themselves, opening with “the most beautiful exit” and promoted in a nation whose leaders want to make it easier to die. None of Hatch’s efforts to procure treatment were reflected in the corporate ad glorying her death.

Hatch didn’t have to be put down like some dog with a tumor. She just couldn’t find proper care in Canada’s system of medicine where socialism has turned health care it into death care.

“Hatch’s case fits into an ever-expanding constellation of Canadians who want to live, but applied for medically assisted death out of desperation after failed attempts to seek appropriate care,” the National Post reported. “Last year, B.C. woman Donna Duncan was able to swiftly receive approval for assisted suicide in an Abbotsford hospital after years of unsuccessful attempts to find treatment for chronic mental-health issues.”

The Post described Duncan’s family as “blindsided” by the hospital’s decision to kill her.

“In several more egregious cases, Canadians have even been offered MAID in lieu of proper medical treatment,” the paper reported. Case in point: In November, Canadian lawmakers heard about five separate cases of veterans offered MAID instead of treatment for mental health issues ranging from depression to PTSD.

Of course, the topic of assisted suicide isn’t easy, and certainly, not all Democrats advocate for it. But the pendulum is swinging from mere legalization to promotion of medically assisted dead, where sick patients who want to live but struggle to acquire proper care end up pressured to let hospitals kill them instead. Make no mistake, Canada’s approach to assisted suicide is coming here.

Last year, California Democrat Gov. Gavin Newsom signed a law that relaxed restrictions for doctors to kill their patients. Individuals who agree to MAID can now be put down after 48 hours instead of 15 days.

Endorsed predominantly by Democrats — much like abortion up until birth — euthanasia has been legalized in Oregon, D.C., Hawaii, Washington, Maine, Colorado, New Jersey, and Vermont.

There’s even a growing movement on the left to participate in a “voluntary human extinction,” which is contributing to low birth rates today. President Joe Biden’s coronavirus adviser, Ezekiel Emanuel, who was also the architect of Obamacare, has argued for years that Americans should die by 75. He’s 65 now, so let’s hope he enjoys his 10 remaining years.

Tristan Justice is the western correspondent for The Federalist. He has also written for The Washington Examiner and The Daily Signal. His work has also been featured in Real Clear Politics and Fox News. Tristan graduated from George Washington University where he majored in political science and minored in journalism. Follow him on Twitter at @JusticeTristan or contact him at Tristan@thefederalist.com.