On Dec. 6, the families of law enforcement officers honored for service during the Jan. 6, 2021, Capitol attack refused to shake hands with GOP leadership. (Video: Reuters)

Listen Comment on this story Comment Gift Article Share

The family members of a police officer who died as a result of the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol refused to shake hands with the Republican leaders at a ceremony awarding law enforcement the Congressional Gold Medal. Wp Get the full experience. Choose your plan ArrowRight Gladys Sicknick, the mother of U.S. Capitol Police Officer Brian D. Sicknick, said GOP leaders’ commitment to promoting Donald Trump’s false narratives about the insurrection that led to her son’s death has taken priority over assisting the some 140 law enforcement officers injured during the attack.

According to the District’s chief medical examiner, Sicknick died of natural causes one day after suffering two strokes while confronting members of the violent mob that attempted to overturn the 2020 presidential election.

“They’re just two-faced,” she told CNN on Tuesday following the awards ceremony. “I’m just tired of them standing there and saying how wonderful the Capitol Police is and then they turn around and go down to Mar-a-Lago and kiss his ring and come back.”

Advertisement

“It just, it just hurts,” Sicknick added.

Republicans and Democrats gathered Tuesday to award Congressional Gold Medals — the highest honor from Congress — to all law enforcement who protected lawmakers while defending the Capitol during the Jan. 6 attack, including members of the U.S. Capitol Police and D.C. police.

About 140 members of law enforcement were injured as rioters attacked them with flagpoles, baseball bats, stun guns, bear spray and pepper spray. In dramatic remarks, D.C. Police Chief Robert J. Contee III said Tuesday’s event was the first time many officers had returned to the Capitol complex since the insurrection.

“Many of us still carry the physical, mental and emotional scars after that mob of thousands launched a violent assault in an attempt to halt the counting of electoral ballots,” Contee said. “The sound of metal poles and other objects striking the bodies, helmets and shields may still ring loudly, the air still thick with spray and other chemicals, making it difficult for our officers to see and breathe.”

Advertisement

After family members received the medals, they shook hands with Democratic leaders — House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (Calif.) and Senate Majority Leader Charles E. Schumer (N.Y.). Gladys Sicknick received a kiss from Schumer. The family members ignored an extended hand from Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) and walked past House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.).

A spokesman for McCarthy had no immediate comment. McConnell, questioned about the incident Tuesday afternoon, focused on the officers and the awards.

“I would respond by saying today we gave the gold medal to the heroes of January 6th,” he told reporters. “We admire and respect them. They laid their lives on the line, and that’s why we gave a gold medal today to the heroes of January 6th.”

On Jan. 6, 2021, a pro-Trump mob stormed the Capitol to try to stop Congress from counting the electoral votes affirming Joe Biden as the winner of the 2020 presidential election.

Advertisement

In the immediate aftermath, McConnell and McCarthy condemned the attack and indicated that Trump was to blame. But McCarthy refused to vote to impeach Trump on a charge of inciting an insurrection and McConnell voted to acquit Trump after a Senate trial.

McCarthy later traveled to Mar-a-Lago to meet with Trump.

Sicknick’s family lobbied Congress to establish an independent commission to investigate the attack. McCarthy opposed creation of the panel and, in the Senate, all Republicans banded together in opposition. Pelosi and Democrats went ahead in creating a bipartisan committee to investigate, though McCarthy refused to cooperate.

After the ceremony, Ken Sicknick, the late officer’s brother, said his refusal to shake hands with the Republican leaders was “self-explanatory” given their fealty to Trump.

Advertisement

“Whatever hold that Trump has on them, they’ve back-stepped, they’ve danced,” he told CBS. “They won’t admit to wrongdoing … of Trump, of the rioters.”

Last week, Trump expressed solidarity with the mob that attacked the Capitol, sending a video of support to a fundraising event Thursday night hosted by a group called the Patriot Freedom Project, which is supporting families of those being prosecuted by the government.

“It’s disgusting,” Sicknick said about Rep. Louie Gohmert (R-Tex.), who presented Simone Gold, a rioter, with a flag flown over the Capitol after her release from prison. “It takes away … the heroism my brother showed.”

Sicknick praised Rep. Liz Cheney (R-Wyo.) for her work on the committee investigating the Jan. 6 attack but criticized the Republicans who refused to explore how the insurrection happened and Trump’s role.

Advertisement

“Unlike Liz Cheney, they have no idea what integrity is,” he said, explaining why GOP lawmakers were undeserving of a handshake. “They can’t stand up for what’s right and wrong.”

“With them, it’s party first,” Sicknick added.

McCarthy has indicated that when Republicans take over the majority next month, they will investigate the Jan. 6 committee’s work.

On Tuesday, he praised law enforcement across the country for their “essential brotherhood.”

“Putting on the badge means putting yourselves in harm’s way to protect others, to keep the country safe,” McCarthy said. “These brave men and women are heroes, heroes who protected so many from harm on that day. Heroes who live out the code to protect and serve. Heroes who do the noble work. Too many people take that for granted.”

McConnell praised law enforcement officers for sacrificing their lives so that lawmakers could fulfill their commitment to certify the election declaring Biden president.

Advertisement

“Because of your bravery and professionalism, Congress finished our job that very night,” he said. “Because you honored your oaths to support and defend the Constitution, we were able to honor ours. That is a reality that was made especially clear 23 months ago. But it is true every single day.”

“Thank you for having our backs,” McConnell added. “Thank you for saving our country. Thank you for being not just our friends, but our heroes.”

In a separate incident, former D.C. officer Michael Fanone, who was severely injured on Jan. 6 and is an outspoken and recognizable advocate for police who defended the Capitol, said members of his own force jeered and taunted him during the ceremony.

Fanone said that as he walked to a bathroom while guests were being seated before the ceremony started, a member of the department’s Special Operations Division held his hands in the shape of a plaque and told him in a sarcastic tone: “There he is, the great American hero. Thank you for gracing us with your presence.” Fanone said he turned and saw him mouth a profanity.

Advertisement

Fanone said he walked away but then returned to confront the officer, whom he said was among a group from the Civil Disturbance Unit. Fanone said he told the officer, “Not on this day, of all days, and if you want to talk about it, we can go outside.” He said other members of the unit chimed in with jeers, telling him he “was not a cop anymore” and calling him a “disgrace.”

Fanone said a sergeant then interjected and warned him not to “talk to his cops that way.”

Fanone said other officers separated the group and he walked away.

After the ceremony, Fanone said Contee gave him his gold medal. “I respect the hell out of that guy,” Fanone said of the chief, adding, “Made my day.”

Fanone has been outspoken from days after the insurrection, in which he was severely injured after being dragged into the crowd and beaten unconscious and threatened with death. But his outspokenness in the media and with others has earned him a reputation within the ranks of his own department, he has said, virtually ostracized by those who dislike the publicity he seeks and receives, and others who he says support Trump.

Dustin Sternbeck, the D.C. police department’s chief spokesman, said the event “was a tremendous honor for the Metropolitan Police Department.” He added: “We’re not focused on any one individual. We are focusing on the contributions of an entire department that saved Democracy on Jan. 6, 2021.”

GiftOutline Gift Article