Election Day is next week and key races in Pennsylvania are expected to be close. CNN spoke to voters about the issues and the candidates.

Bruce Ershler, 68, who lives in the Philadelphia suburbs, was in the city on Monday to watch Game 3 of the World Series between the Phillies and the Houston Astros, along with his friend Mike Rogal, 70, who had driven from Pittsburgh.

(Unfortunately, the game was later postponed due to the weather and will be played Tuesday.)

Both identify as swing voters, making them hugely important in a state which is widely regarded as one of the handful that will determine the control of the US Senate.

Mike Rogal, left, and Bruce Ershler, right. Kit Maher/CNN

Ershler said he's voting for Democrat Josh Shapiro for governor, despite being a registered Republican. He described GOP candidate Doug Mastriano as "quite a bit extreme for my views, and I think he would not be good for Pennsylvania."

Specifically, Ershler said he's fearful of Mastriano being an election denier.

"He thinks that the results of 2020 were not valid. I totally disagree with that. And I think that he would tilt things much more to the right wing on a lot of different issues, as opposed to being more moderate. Shapiro is not what I would consider far left, he certainly is — he leans left, but I think he presents a much more moderate view," Ershler said.

On the Senate race, Ershler said he's not a fan of either Democrat John Fetterman or Republican Mehmet Oz.

But, "I think my vote would probably end up being that I'd like to see the Democrats hold or win the Senate. And therefore I would, by default, probably end up voting against Oz. I can't bring myself to say I'm voting for Fetterman, because I really don't like him. But I am really worrisome of it being a Republican House and Republican Senate because I don't think it's good for the country."

Rogal is also voting for Shapiro for governor. "The reason I am is he's a moderate Democrat. I think he does a great job. I think he's a straight shooter. And I don't think he's a radical left.”

Rogal echoed Ershler's sentiments about Mastriano. There are things about him that "seem to be a little bit far right," Rogal said.

However, unlike Ershler, Rogal said he's voting for Oz for Senate. Rogal said his own background as a former surgeon and having acquaintances that know Oz influenced his vote.

“He's an intelligent guy. I think that he expresses himself articulately. I think he's thoughtful. I can obviously relate to somebody who was also in the business, so to speak," Rogal explained.

Major Small. CNN

In West Philadelphia, Major Small, 67, said he's voting for Shapiro and Fetterman.

"I love Democrats. Republicans aren’t for the people. And plus, Fetterman wears a hoodie. I like that," Small said.

“He seems down to earth. He seems like he knows what we’re going through," Small added, speaking about Fetterman.

Small explained that gun violence is a key issue for him and he feels that Shapiro might have a plan to combat it:

"Dealing with the gun violence. People killing people for no apparent reason. It’s senseless. And I don't know, I just hope – sounds like he might have a plan."