Iran was recently pressured into supposedly disbanding its “morality police” after its violent roundup of protesters caused international outcry. The impoverished country run by Islamic theocrats who are one of the world’s largest funders of terrorism made the change the same week its state-controlled press slung bad-faith critiques at America, in a display of the complete unseriousness of those who claim Americans are “oppressed.”

Leading up to the FIFA World Cup match between the U.S. and Iran last week, an Iranian reporter grilled an American soccer player on so-called discrimination in the United States. In the press conference, Press TV’s Milad Javanmardi zeroed in on 23-year-old team captain Tyler Adams, asking if he was okay with playing for “a country that has so much discrimination against black people in its own borders.”

Adams, who is black, calmly answered the reporter’s question by saying, “You know, there’s discrimination everywhere you go. One thing that I’ve learned, especially from living abroad in the past few years … is that in the U.S., we’re continuing to make progress every single day.”

This question Javanmardi asked is eyebrow-raising, especially considering Iran’s horrific treatment of its own people. More than 15,000 protesters are being held in Iranian prisons and hundreds are dead after Ayatollah Khomeini cracked down on the demonstrations.

The protests, which started after 22-year-old Mahsa Amini died in police custody in Iran after being brutally arrested for wearing an “improper” hijab, have been going on for more than 70 days. The government has even threatened to execute the protesters, many of whom are women and teenagers.

More than 227 members of the Iranian Parliament signed a letter arguing those in prison should face the death penalty for defying the government. Only 63 members abstained from signing it.

The inhumane treatment happening in Iran doubtlessly deserves international condemnation. But it also highlights the unseriousness of similar “international criticism” of so-called “discrimination” in the United States. Although America offers more opportunities to all races than arguably anywhere else in the world, her enemies and useless corporate press have fanned flames of racial tension to the point that America’s soccer team was grilled by foreign reporters from a country that kills its women for failing to wear hijabs.

There is no equivalence between the United States and Iran. It’s a tactic of our enemies to fan flames of racial division in America to distract from the abuses of their own regimes. In 2019, following President Donald Trump’s decision to back pro-democracy protesters in Hong Kong, Chinese foreign ministry official Zhao Lijian released a series of tweets condemning “systematic racial discrimination” in the United States.

Part of his tweet read, “Systematic racial discrimination has long existed in US. Ethnic minorities faced restrictions in exercising their voting rights. US made little progress in reducing racial discrimination.”

Supporters of Zhao’s tweet, and even Zhao himself, are deflecting from the reality that the Chinese government has been routinely locking up and abusing Uyghur Muslims in “reeducation” camps since 2017 — subjecting them to forced labor, involuntary sterilization, rape, and other atrocities — not to mention countless other human rights violations the CCP has committed over the years.

Yet, many continue to push the radical talking points that the United States is an oppressive nation where black or Hispanic people are systemically mistreated because of the color of their skin or don’t have the same rights as other citizens — something that couldn’t be further from the truth.

The anti-American media and politicians in the U.S. contribute to this insane rhetoric, choosing to spread the lie that the United States and evil dictatorships are moral peers.

Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez compared the Iranian regime to the pro-life movement in America. “Mahsa Amini was senselessly murdered by the same patriarchal and autocratic forces repressing women the world over” she said in a tweet. “The right to choose belongs to us all, from hijabs to reproductive care.”

In 2020, a New York Times Magazine piece by Isabel Wilkerson compared so-called discrimination in the U.S. to Nazi Germany, the nation that murdered more than 11 million people during WWII.

And this isn’t a recent phenomenon. In 2011, Time Magazine published an article asking which country has a worse record on human rights, America or China, and noting that China’s report on the U.S. said “The United States turned a blind eye to its own terrible human rights situation.”

There are many other examples of this.

The corporate news media lie regularly, and their dishonest equivocation between America and foreign dictatorships is just one example. Americans should have no patience for these outlets fanning the wildfire of hate and division in the U.S. when there are people in other countries losing their lives and facing actual oppression every single day.

Bailey Duran is a writer who is passionate about faith, family, and traditional American values. She graduated from Liberty University in May 2021 with a B.S. in journalism.