By Philip Bump

Email Did a renowned graphic designer forward this to you? Sign up here. Close readers of this newsletter will recall a tweet I shared in last week’s edition, making a joke about a particularly unusual data visualization. It depicted the level of new house construction in the form of a house … twerking? I’m not sure. (I don’t think it’s twerking, as such, since that only emerged in American culture a few years after 1982, the last year indicated on the chart. Plus why would a house be twerking about new housing starts? Such are the questions that arise when we start anthropomorphizing structures.) Anyway, it was this tweet. Soon after the newsletter came out, I got an email. Should I ever revisit the Twerk House Tweet, it read — not using that phrase — “I thought you might like to see something I did in Time Magazine the previous year!” ADVERTISEMENT Included in the email was this chart from 1982, showing how housing costs had ballooned in the U.S. It does, in fact, bear striking similarities with the housing-starts chart, from the two-window, one-door facade to the little clutch of bushes at the base. But it also works better as a metaphor: the house is literally rising out of reach. And that little family is mad about it. “Look at the price, though!” Nigel Holmes, the creator of the above illustration, said when we spoke on the phone on Thursday. “$67,000?!” If you’re curious, that’s about $220,000 in 2022 dollars — when the median price of a single-family house is $384,900. Holmes arrived in the U.S. from England in 1977 (median price: $160,000 in 2022 dollars) with a background in freelance illustration. In short order, he had a gig doing work for Time, which, he explained, had recently broken new ground in its design. “I arrived in New York,” Holmes told me. “I got into a phone booth at the bottom of the Time-Life Building and called” Ray Cave, a legendary editor at the magazine. “And he answered the phone!” ADVERTISEMENT Cave invited Holmes up. Time, it turns out, had been looking for someone to do data illustrations. “He called one of the researchers from the map and charts department and said, 'What can we give this guy to do this week?',” Holmes recounted. And that was that. In time, Holmes became the magazine’s graphics director. Close readers of this newsletter may also recall that the overarching theme of last week’s edition was my appreciation for the way data visualizations used to be made: the slow, tedious process of creating illustrations and doing measurements by hand. Holmes was an innovator in this field, and he explained how the process worked at Time in the pre-computer days. The ideas for visualizations were driven by reporters, who were generally assigned stories by editors. At first, Holmes said, reporters didn’t love the inclusion of charts — it was less space for their writing. Over time, though, the visualizations proved their value. Holmes explained his process when we spoke. He also sent me examples of each stage of that process, using a visualization that appeared in the magazine in 1980. First (at upper left), he’d do a rough draft of an illustration to get buy-in on the general appearance. Next, he’d sketch it in pencil, here (top right) using a grid to ensure that the actual figures being illustrated were correctly positioned. Then, he’d prepare the file for print. The lettering wasn’t simply printed on the image as would be the case today. It was produced separately and positioned properly on the illustration. (For the kids out there: Different typefaces used to be available not as fonts on a menu but on transfer sheets. It was complicated.) When he started at Time, the print process itself differed by market. U.S. versions of the magazine were printed in full color, Holmes said, while in Asia, the illustrations were all black-and-white. In Europe, the magazine was printed in two colors: black and a spot color. “The second color was always determined by who was advertising that week,” Holmes said. “So if it was Hertz, you got a yellow. So I prayed for a gold chart or something those weeks.” At lower right above, you can see the final chart. The advertiser that week must have been Avis. Holmes eventually left Time, doing freelance work, lecturing and writing books. He has a new book out next week, as it turns out, called “Joyful Infographics.” I would guess that neither of the examples Holmes sent me for this newsletter — rising home prices; soaring inflation — count as “joyful.” But perhaps he could write another book: “Everything Old is New Again.”