CNN —

This was never going to be a traditional World Cup.

Breaking ground in the Middle East and played for the first time in the European winter, it was always going to look and feel different.

Qatar was described by some as the most controversial World Cup tournament host, with criticism ranging from alleged corruption in the bidding process to a callous disregard for human rights.

It is undoubtedly right to shine a light on the deaths and conditions endured by migrant workers to make this tournament happen, and LGBTQ and women’s rights too, although some Qataris might wonder why their country came under such intense criticism when countries with questionable human rights records, or laws that curtail the freedoms of certain members of society, have also hosted major sporting events in recent years.

The last World Cup was held in Russia, for example, a country that has made it illegal for anyone to promote same-sex relationships or suggest that non-heterosexual orientations are “normal.”

But the world is complicated and full of contradictions, and hosting a major sporting event is about more than a country’s politics. It’s also about its culture and its people, their hopes and their dreams.

Over the last four weeks, this tiny Gulf State truly became a global village. Fans of all 32 teams, along with supporters from many other countries, mingled cheek by jowl in a way that was never possible in previous tournaments, which were spread across much larger geographical areas.

Sometimes it was hard to tell who was cheering for who as processions of cheering fans would follow drummers through Souq Waqif, a marketplace in downtown Doha, drunk only on the joy of the shared experience.

“The atmosphere here in Qatar is like a Moroccan wedding,” one supporter told CNN in the thick of the festivities. “When everyone is enjoying the music and singing, it’s like a big party.”

Supporters dance and sing at the Souq Waqif in Doha on November 30, 2022, during the Qatar 2022 World Cup football tournament. Fadel Senna/AFP/Getty Images

Morocco’s thrilling run to the semifinals was a watershed moment for the sport, the first time that a team from outside Europe and South America had made it to the final week in the tournament’s 92-year history.

But even before the Atlas Lions’ stirring win against Portugal, it was already Africa’s most successful World Cup, as it was for Asia, too, which saw three teams – Japan, South Korea, and Australia – make it to the round of 16 for the first time ever. In 2005, world governing body FIFA ratified Australia’s switch from the Oceania Football Confederation to the Asian Football Confederation.

There have certainly been matches that will be remembered for years to come.

Saudi Arabia scored a result for the ages, beating Argentina in its opening match, while Iran managed to shine, despite the protests and violence in their homeland with admirable performances against Wales and the US.

Fans of Morocco show their support ahead of the third place match against Croatia. Ashraf Amra/Anadolu Agency/Getty Images

This was a tournament in which the underdogs challenged the old-world order, and won universal respect for doing so.

Moroccan supporter Boubker Benna told CNN that he believes the message of this World Cup has been self-determination.

“You may be an underdog,” he said, “but if you do your work, you can achieve big, big things. That’s what [Morocco head coach] Walid Regragui is trying to prove. And that’s what Morocco is trying to prove.”

It’s not unusual to see African fans rooting for other teams from their continent, but it has been particularly striking to witness the shared joy in Qatar, where CNN spoke to fans from Egypt, Syria, Sudan, Algeria, Saudi Arabia, and the Palestinian territories, all cheering for Morocco in the later stages.

“If France is playing, you will find only French people supporting their team, never England or Germany behind them. And I don’t know why,” explained Moroccan fan Adam Marzoug.

A musician from Oman perform traditional music at the Corniche sea promenade in Doha, Qatar, Saturday, Nov. 26, 2022. Francisco Seco/AP

He continued: “That’s why it’s special for the Arab and Muslim and African countries. That’s what makes us strong in every tournament, this is just the beginning.”

His friend, Oumaima Amallah, added: “Despite all the political and historical problems, Muslims, Arabs and Africans love each other and they are like brothers and sisters and everyone is happy for us, like they would be happy for their own nation.”

It was almost poetic that Morocco overturned two of its former colonizers, Spain and Portugal, and went toe-to-toe with a third, France. But any score settling was done politely, with respect.

Supporters who spoke with CNN would always praise Qatar for hosting the World Cup and express gratitude and thanks for bringing it to the region.

And although there was surprise, even an outcry in some media establishments, when Budweiser vending stations were removed from the stadium concourses on the eve of the tournament, did anyone really miss the alcohol?

Certainly, many that we spoke to, including the former player turned broadcaster Ally McCoist, agreed that the atmosphere among the crowds was much more congenial as a result.

We watched security personnel in the stadia respectfully asking shirtless Argentina fans to cover up, humbly gesturing with their palms closed by their chest. Local customs were followed and cultures exchanged. The sea of humanity that flowed from every stadium to Metro station passed by a series of musicians and dancers.

What might have once been described as a culture clash felt more like a cultural exchange here in Qatar.

“We must be open minded,” said another Moroccan fan, David Hamriri, an engineer who currently works in Europe. “I am very rich, culturally, because I am open minded.

“We have emotions,” he continued, “We have many conflicts in the world. But when we enjoy football, we forget this problem. We forget the economic crisis, and we return to the origin. A value of humanity, shared between Occidental and Oriental society. I find it amazing.”

Fans are seen on the Doha Metro ahead of the match between Argentina and Mexico. Amanda Perobelli/Reuters

The fans CNN spoke to were leaving Qatar with positive memories of their experiences.

England fan Theo Ogden, who attended all of the tournament’s 64 games, told CNN: “People said that you couldn’t host it in the desert, and they proved them wrong.

“They’ve been so welcoming. You won’t find a fan out here who will say that they had a bad time, and it’s because they are so hospitable. I don’t think that gets spoken about enough.”

Ogden could only have attempted his feat at this World Cup, where every stadium was just a metro or cab ride away.

The landmass of the 2026 World Cup will be almost 2,000 times bigger in the USA, Mexico and Canada. Qatar managed to turn the world’s most popular game into something much smaller, and it was all the better for it.

From the results on the field, to the experience on the ground. Qatar 2022 has been memorable.

But we mustn’t forget that there were members of the soccer community who refused to travel here, LGBTQ fans who felt it wasn’t safe for them to support their teams because of the Gulf State’s laws. Homosexuality is illegal in Qatar and punishable by up to three years in prison.

LGBTQ rights was an issue that would not go away during the tournament as reports also emerged of security officials asking people to remove rainbow-colored items of clothing – a symbol of LGBTQ pride.

FIFA’s decision to threaten sanctions for any player wearing a “OneLove” armband, which features a heart containing different colors to promote inclusion, created a rift between the sport’s governing body and the seven European nations whose captains had planned to wear it.

Lionel Messi holds up the World Cup trophy after Argentina defeated France in the tournament final on Sunday, December 18. Jabin Botsford/The Washington Post/Getty Images Argentina fans celebrate in Buenos Aires. Rodrigo Abd/AP Messi holds the Golden Ball trophy, awarded to the tournament's top player, while kissing the World Cup trophy. Julian Finney/Getty Images Argentina players react after Gonzalo Montiel scored his penalty to clinch the shootout victory. Julian Finney/Getty Images French star Kylian Mbappé sits on the team's bench after the loss. Franck Fife/AFP/Getty Images French players react during the penalty shootout. Julian Finney/Getty Images Montiel becomes emotional after slotting home the winning penalty. Ian MacNicol/Getty Images Argentina goalkeeper Emiliano Martinez celebrates after blocking Kingsley Coman's penalty in the shootout. Natacha Pisarenko/AP Mbappé scored a penalty late in extra time to force the shootout. He scored all of France's three goals. Natacha Pisarenko/AP Messi scored for Argentina in extra time, giving his team a brief 3-2 lead. Hannah Mckay/Reuters Mbappé slams home his team's second goal to tie the match at 2-2 in the second half. It came just moments after he scored on a penalty. Dan Mullan/Getty Images Argentina's Julián Álvarez, left, competes with France's Dayot Upamecano. Jose Breton/Pics Action/NurPhoto/Getty Images Angel Di Maria celebrates after scoring Argentina's second goal in the first half. Argentina led 2-0 at halftime. Catherine Ivill/Getty Images Di Maria slots the ball past France goalkeeper Hugo Lloris, finishing an Argentina counterattack for the 2-0 lead. Dan Mullan/Getty Images Messi opens the scoring with a penalty in the 23rd minute. Matthias Hangst/Getty Images Messi celebrates after converting his penalty. Dan Mullan/Getty Images Players line up for the national anthems before the final at the Lusail Stadium. Christophe Ena/AP Croatia players celebrate after defeating Morocco 2-1 in the World Cup's third-place match on Saturday, December 17. David Ramos/FIFA/Getty Images Croatia captain Luka Modrić celebrates with his daughter after the medal ceremony on Saturday. Francisco Seco/AP Morocco's Achraf Dari scores a header to tie the match against Croatia. Croatia ultimately regained the lead with a goal from Mislav Oršić. Alex Livesey - Danehouse/Getty Images Croatia's Joško Gvardiol, right, celebrates after scoring his side's opening goal against Morocco. Francisco Seco/AP French players celebrate after defeating Morocco 2-0 in the World Cup semifinals on Wednesday, December 14. Ulrik Pedersen/DeFodi Images/Getty Images Morocco's Jawad El Yamiq attempts a bicycle kick during the first half against France. His shot clanged off the post. Fabio Ferrari/LaPresse/Sipa Morocco fans show their support at Wednesday's semifinal. Buda Mendes/Getty Images Theo Hernandez scores France's opening goal early in the match against Morocco. Dan Mullan/Getty Images Argentina star Lionel Messi, left, celebrates with teammate Julián Álvarez after Álvarez scored his first of two goals against Croatia in the World Cup semifinals on Tuesday, December 13. Messi scored the other goal on a first-half penalty. Richard Heathcote/Getty Images Croatian defender Joško Gvardiol reacts in the net after Álvarez scored to put Argentina up 3-0. Martin Meissner/AP Argentina players celebrate their 2-0 lead in the first half. David Ramos/FIFA/Getty Images Argentina goalkeeper Emiliano Martinez reaches out for a save against Croatia. Markus Gilliar/GES Sportfoto/Getty Images England's Mason Mount appears dejected as French players celebrate their 2-1 quarterfinal win at the World Cup on December 10. Robbie Jay Barratt/AMAGetty Images French players try to block a Marcus Rashford free kick late in the match. Michael Regan/FIFA/Getty Images Olivier Giroud celebrates after scoring a goal for France that turned out to be the match-winner. Marc Atkins/Getty Images England's Harry Kane scores a penalty to even up the score against France. But he missed a penalty in the second half with France leading 2-1. Clive Brunskill/Getty Images Aurélien Tchouaméni celebrates after scoring France's opening goal against England. Dylan Martinez/Reuters French star Kylian Mbappé is tackled by England's Declan Rice. Matthias Hangst/Getty Images A memorial for American journalist Grant Wahl sits in the press area of Al Bayt Stadium on December 10. Wahl died after collapsing during the quarterfinal match between Argentina and the Netherlands. His wife, Dr. Celine Gounder, said he died of an aortic aneurysm that ruptured. Hector Vivas/FIFA/Getty Images Morocco players celebrate after defeating Portugal 1-0 on December 10. The "Atlas Lions" made history by becoming the first African team to reach a World Cup semifinal. Tom Weller/dpa/Getty Images Morocco fans celebrate in the stands following their team's victory on December 10. Justin Setterfield/Getty Images Sofiane Boufal of Morocco celebrates with a family member. Mike Hewitt/FIFA/Getty Images Portugal's Cristiano Ronaldo sinks to the ground beside Moroccan goalkeeper Yassine Bounou. Manan Vatsyayana/AFP/Getty Images Youssef En-Nesyri heads the ball to score Morocco's goal against Portugal. Francois Nel/Getty Images Players from Argentina, top, and the Netherlands react at the end of the penalty shootout that decided their quarterfinal match at the World Cup on December 9. Argentina prevailed on spot kicks after the match ended 2-2. Paul Childs/Reuters Argentina's Lionel Messi, left, and Leandro Paredes celebrate their berth in the semifinals. Ricardo Mazalan/AP Argentina goalkeeper Emiliano Martinez tries to shake Teun Koopmeiners' hand during the shootout. Elsa/Getty Images Martinez saves the penalty of Dutch captain Virgil van Dijk early in the shootout. Martinez made two saves in the shootout, which finished 4-3 for Argentina. Kai Pfaffenbach/Reuters Dutch players celebrate after Wout Weghorst scored late into second-half stoppage time to extend the match. Patrick Smith/FIFA/Getty Images Weghorst overpowers Enzo Fernández on a carefully orchestrated set play to tie the match at 2-2. Patrick Smith/FIFA/Getty Images Van Dijk knocks over Paredes as Dutch players run onto the field in the second half. The skirmish started after a hard Paredes foul on Nathan Aké. Paredes then smashed the ball into the Dutch bench. Matthias Hangst/Getty Images Brazilian star Neymar is comforted by Dani Alves after Brazil were knocked out of the World Cup by Croatia on December 9. Croatia won a penalty shootout after the match ended 1-1. Jewel Samad/AFP/Getty Images Croatian goalkeeper Dominik Livaković celebrates after Marquinhos hit the post on the last kick of the penalty shootout. It was Croatia's second straight shootout win in this World Cup. Matthew Childs/Reuters Croatian players run around the field and celebrate their victory as Marquinhos, bottom right, falls to his knees. Alessandra Tarantino/AP Croatia's Borna Sosa hits Antony in the face while tussling for position. Frank Augstein/AP Neymar opens the scoring in extra time after the match went scoreless in regulation. With the goal, he tied Pelé as Brazil's all-time goalscorer. But Croatia would tie the match a few minutes later with a goal from Bruno Petković. Manu Fernandez/AP Gonçalo Ramos celebrates his first of three goals in Portugal's 6-1 thrashing of Switzerland on December 6. The win booked Portugal's spot in the quarterfinals. Justin Setterfield/Getty Images Pepe scores Portugal's second goal on December 6. Peter Cziborra/Reuters Portugal manager Fernando Santos speaks with Cristiano Ronaldo before bringing him off the bench against Switzerland. Ronaldo started the first three group-stage games but was replaced by Ramos for the round-of-16 clash. Justin Setterfield/Getty Images Morocco players celebrate after Achraf Hakimi scored to win a penalty shootout against Spain on December 6. The match ended 0-0 before going to the shootout. Wolfgang Rattay/Reuters Morocco's Abdelhamid Sabiri scores during the penalty shootout against Spain. Matthew Childs/Reuters Spain's Aymeric Laporte reacts after the loss to Morocco. Bernadett Szabo/Reuters Morocco goalkeeper Yassine Bounou makes a save near the end of the Spain match. Richard Heathcote/Getty Images Hakimi tries to win the ball from Spain's Dani Olmo, seen in the foreground. Jack Guez/AFP/Getty Images Richarlison, left, scores Brazil's third goal during the World Cup match against South Korea on December 5. Brazil won 4-1 to advance to the quarterfinals. Manu Fernandez/AP From left, Vinicius Junior, Raphinha, Lucas Paqueta and Neymar celebrate after one of Brazil's four first-half goals. Manu Fernandez/AP Mario Pasalic, right, celebrates with goalkeeper Dominik Livaković after Croatia won a penalty shootout over Japan. Livaković made three saves in the shootout after the match ended 1-1. Frank Augstein/AP Livaković saves the first penalty in the shootout against Japan. Marko Djurica/Reuters Croatian midfielder Lovro Majer falls near Japanese midfielder Ao Tanaka. Andrej Isakovic/AFP/Getty Images England players celebrate after Harry Kane scored against Senegal on December 4. England won 3-0 to advance to the quarterfinals. Carl Recine/Reuters A Senegal supporter cheers before the match against England. Anne-Christine Poujoulat/AFP/Getty Images France's Olivier Giroud celebrates scoring his team's first goal against Poland on December 4. With the goal, Giroud became Les Bleus' all-time top goalscorer. France defeated Poland 3-1 to advance to the quarterfinals. Kirill Kudryavtsev/AFP/Getty Images France's Dayot Upamecano collides with Poland goalkeeper Wojciech Szczesny. Natacha Pisarenko/AP Argentina's Lionel Messi, left, celebrates with teammates after opening the scoring against Australia on December 3. Argentina's 2-1 victory set up a quarterfinal match against the Netherlands. Hector Vivas/FIFA/Getty Images Australian fans in Sydney celebrate their team's goal against Argentina on December 3. Loren Elliott/Reuters US captain Tyler Adams sinks to the ground after the Americans lost 3-1 to the Netherlands on December 3. Dan Mullan/Getty Images The United States' Brenden Aaronson, left, and the Netherlands' Frenkie de Jong battle for the ball on November 3. Elsa/Getty Images Switzerland's Remo Freuler, right, celebrates with Ricardo Rodriguez after scoring the third and decisive goal in the 3-2 victory over Serbia on December 2. With the win, Switzerland advanced to the next stage of the World Cup. Suhaib Salem/Reuters Players argue during the Serbia-Switzerland match. Serbia was eliminated with the loss. Alexander Hassenstein/Getty Images Switzerland's Manuel Akanji heads the ball during the Serbia match. Carl Recine/Reuters Dušan Vlahović scores Serbia's second goal on December 2. Suhaib Salem/Reuters Bremer heads the ball for Brazil during the match against Cameroon on December 2. Cameroon came out on top 1-0, but Brazil still won Group G thanks to two earlier victories. Amanda Perobelli/Reuters Bremer controls the ball against Cameroon. Moises Castillo/AP Cameroon's Eric Maxim Choupo-Moting tries to bring the ball down between Fabinho and Éder Militão. Amanda Perobelli/Reuters South Korea's Hwang Hee-chan celebrates December 2 after his team's 2-1 victory over Portugal clinched a spot in the next round. Hwang scored the game-winning goal in second-half stoppage time. Stuart Franklin/Getty Images South Korea's Son Heung-min slides for a tackle against Portugal's João Mário. Portugal lost the match but still won Group H. Glyn Kirk/AFP/Getty Images Portugal's Ruben Neves, left, heads the ball against South Korea. Patricia de Melo Moreira/AFP/Getty Images Uruguay's Giorgian de Arrascaeta scores his second goal in the 2-0 victory over Ghana on December 2. Uruguay finished Group H with the same amount of points as South Korea, but the South Koreans advanced because they scored more goals in the group. Ashley Landis/AP Uruguay's Luis Suarez, foreground, looks to head the ball against Ghana. Siphiwe Sibeko/Reuters Ghana's Inaki Williams leaps for a kick against Uruguay. Serhat Cagdas/Anadolu Agency via Getty Images Japan's Kaoru Mitoma passes the ball near the goal line, leading to a goal that was upheld by a video assistant referee (VAR) review during the match against Spain on December 1. Japan took a 2-1 lead and held on to win by that score. It finished first in Group E while Spain finished second. Petr David Josek/AP Wataru Endo celebrates with teammates after Japan's victory. Kim Hong-Ji/Reuters Spain's Alejandro Balde tries to hold up Japan's Ritsu Doan. Ryan Pierse/Getty Images Germany's Thomas Müller hugs Antonio Rüdiger after their 4-2 win over Costa Rica on December 1. Despite the win, Germany was eliminated from the tournament because Japan defeated Spain. Thaier Al-Sudani/Reuters German goalkeeper Manuel Neuer punches a ball clear against Costa Rica. Ariel Schalit/AP Referee Stephanie Frappart, center, warms up with assistant referees Karen Diaz, left, and Neuza Back before the Germany-Costa Rica match. They made history as the first all-female refereeing crew for a men's World Cup match. Frappert became the first woman to referee a men's World Cup match. Matthew Childs/Reuters Belgium players react after their 0-0 draw against Croatia meant that they would be eliminated on December 1. Belgium finished third at the last World Cup in 2018. Thanassis Stavrakis/AP Belgium's Leandro Trossard, left, and Croatia's Josko Gvardiol compete for a ball. Croatia finished second in Group F to advance to the tournament's knockout stage. Luca Bruno/AP Croatia's Borna Sosa heads the ball near Belgium's Thomas Meunier. Thanassis Stavrakis/AP A Belgium supporter looks dejected after the match against Croatia. Stephane Mahe/Reuters Morocco head coach Walid Regragui is lifted into the air by his team after a 2-1 victory over Canada on December 1. Morocco finished first in Group F. Catherine Ivill/Getty Images Canada's Alistair Johnston tries to head the ball into Morocco's net on December 1. Matthias Hangst/Getty Images Youssef En-Nesyri celebrates after scoring Morocco's second goal against Canada. Carl Recine/Reuters Argentina's Julian Alvarez is put in a headlock by teammate Enzo Fernandez after scoring against Poland on November 30. Argentina won 2-0 to finish first in Group C and advance to the knockout stage. Poland qualified as well despite the loss. Natacha Pisarenko/AP Argentina star Lionel Messi is hit in the face by Poland's Wojciech Szczesny in the first half November 30. A penalty was given after video review, but Szczesny saved Messi's shot. Tim Nwachukwu/Getty Images Messi and Poland's Bartosz Bereszynski compete for the ball. Guiseppe Cacace/AFP/Getty Images Mexico's Orbelín Pineda, left, and Saudi Arabia's Mohamed Kanno go for a header during their match on November 30. Mexico won 2-1. Moises Castillo/AP Mexico's Henry Martín scores the first goal against Saudi Arabia. Matthew Childs/Reuters A fan wears La Catrina-style makeup at the start of the Mexico-Saudi Arabia match. Ricardo Mazalan/AP Australia's Mathew Leckie, left, celebrates after scoring the only goal in the 1-0 win over Denmark on November 30. The win advanced the "Socceroos" to the knockout stage. Francisco Seco/AP A Denmark supporter reacts to Australia's goal on November 30. Robbie Jay Barratt/AMA/Getty Images Australia's Riley McGree shields the ball from Denmark's Mikkel Damsgaard. Wolfgang Rattay/Reuters Tunisian players mob teammate Wahbi Khazri after his goal against France on November 30. Tunisia won 1-0, but it was not enough to advance to the knockout stage. France still won Group D. Ian MacNicol/Getty Images Tunisia's Issam Jebali heads the ball next to France's Aurélien Tchouaméni. Christophe Ena/AP American star Christian Pulisic scores the only goal in the match against Iran on November 29. With the victory, the United States advanced to the tournament's knockout stage. Yukihito Taguchi/USA Today Sports/Reuters Iran's Ramin Rezaeian heads the ball during the match against the United States. Kai Pfaffenbach/Reuters Shaq Moore slides in for a tackle against Iran's Abolfazl Jalali. Manu Fernandez/AP England's Phil Foden celebrates after scoring his team's second goal in the 3-0 win over Wales on November 29. England won Group B. Markus Gilliar/GES Sportfoto/Getty Images Marcus Rashford scores England's third goal against Wales. He had two goals in the match. Laurence Griffiths/Getty Images Rashford's free kick whizzes by Wales' Danny Ward for England's first goal. Hannah McKay/Pool/Getty Images Wales' Connor Roberts stretches for a ball during the match against England. Abbie Parr/AP Senegal's Ismaila Sarr celebrates after a 2-1 win over Ecuador secured his team's spot in the knockout round of the World Cup. Dylan Martinez/Reuters Senegal's Ismail Jakobs, left, tries to fend off Ecuador's Enner Valencia on November 29. Stephane Mahe/Reuters The Netherlands' Frenkie de Jong scores his team's second goal in the 2-0 victory over Qatar on November 29. The Dutch won Group A. Qatar, the host nation, lost all three of its games. Julian Finney/Getty Images Qatar's Homam Ahmed leaps near the Netherlands' Denzel Dumfries on November 29. Alberto Lingria/Reuters Portugal's Bruno Fernandes celebrates after scoring his second goal in the 2-0 victory over Uruguay on November 28. The win clinched Portugal's spot in the knockout stage. Jose Breton/Pics Action/NurPhoto via Getty Images A man runs onto the field with a rainbow flag during the match between Portugal and Uruguay. The man, an Italian named Mario Ferri, was also wearing a shirt that said "save Ukraine" on the front and "respect for Iranian women" on the back. In a series of posts of his Instagram story, Ferri called himself the "new Robin Hood" and said, "Breaking the rules if you do it for a good cause is NEVER A CRIME." He was banned from attending future matches. Abbie Parr/AP Portugal forward Cristiano Ronaldo tries to head the ball toward goal in the second half of the Uruguay match. He appeared at first to nod in the first goal, but after review it was determined that he didn't touch it and Bruno was credited with the goal. Kirill Kudryavtsev/AFP/Getty Images Portugal's Bernardo Silva, left, tries to keep the ball from Uruguay's Mathias Olivera. Kirill Kudryavtsev/AFP/Getty Images Brazil's Vinícius Júnior performs a rabona during his team's 1-0 victory over Switzerland on November 28. The Brazilians' win ensured that they would be advancing from their group. Clive Brunskill/Getty Images Brazilian midfielder Casemiro, front left, is mobbed by teammates after scoring against Switzerland. Carl Recine/Reuters Ghana midfielder Mohammed Kudus celebrates a goal during the match against South Korea on November 28. It was his second goal of the day, and it was the difference in Ghana's 3-2 victory. Jung Yeon-je/AFP/Getty Images South Korea's Kim Min-jae, left, and Ghana's Andre Ayew, center, jump for a header during their match on November 28. Lee Jin-man/AP Ghana supporters celebrate victory on November 28. Jose Breton/Pics Action/NurPhoto via Getty Images Serbia's Sergej Milinković-Savić celebrates a goal during a 3-3 draw with Cameroon on November 28. Anthony Dibon/Icon Sport/Getty Images Cameroon forward Eric Maxim Choupo-Moting scores his team's third goal against Serbia, tying the match in the second half. Jewel Samad/AFP/Getty Images Fans of Spain attend the team's match against Germany on November 27. The match ended in a 1-1 draw. Paul Chesterton/Sipa/AP Belgium's Thorgan Hazard, left, and Morocco's Selim Amallah compete for the ball on November 27. Morocco defeated Belgium 2-0. It was Morocco's first World Cup win since 1998 — and its third-ever at the tournament. Mustafa Yalcin/Anadolu Agency/Getty Images Alphonso Davies celebrates after scoring Canada's first-ever World Cup goal on November 27. The goal against Croatia came 68 seconds after kickoff and was the fastest at the 2022 tournament so far. But despite the early lead, Canada lost 4-1. Yukihito Taguchi/USA Today Sports/Reuters Costa Rica's Yeltsin Tejeda and Keysher Fuller celebrate their 1-0 win over Japan on November 27. Fuller scored the winning goal. Issei Kato/Reuters Kylian Mbappé scores his second goal on November 26, leading France to a 2-1 victory over Denmark. The win ensured that France, the tournament's defending champions, would be the first team to qualify for the knockout stage. Mohammad Karamali/DeFodi Images/Getty Images Argentina's Lionel Messi celebrates scoring the opening goal against Mexico on November 26. Argentina went on to win the match 2-0. Kirill Kudryavtsev/AFP/Getty Images Fans in Doha, Qatar, watch the match between Poland and Saudi Arabia on November 26. Ibraheem Al Omari/Reuters Robert Lewandowski celebrates after scoring Poland's second goal in the 2-0 win against Saudi Arabia on November 26. This was Lewandowski's first-ever World Cup goal. Lars Baron/Getty Images Australia's Jackson Irvine falls on Tunisia's Aissa Laidouni as they battle for the ball on November 26. Australia won 1-0. Jewel Samad/AFP/Getty Images US star Christian Pulisic takes a shot against England in the first half of their World Cup match on November 25. The shot smacked off the crossbar, and the game would eventually end 0-0. Clive Mason/Getty Images England goalkeeper Jordan Pickford dives to make a save in the match against the United States. Kirill Kudryavtsev/AFP/Getty Images Senegal players celebrate at the corner flag after Bamba Dieng scored the third goal in their 3-1 victory over host nation Qatar. Petr Josek/AP Mohammed Muntari, center, celebrates after scoring Qatar's first-ever World Cup goal. Muntari headed home a cross in the 78th minute to cut Senegal's lead to 2-1. Bernadett Szabo/Reuters Senegal fans attend the match against Qatar. Senegal's football team is nicknamed the Lions of Teranga. Ozan Kose/AFP/Getty Images The Netherlands' Cody Gakpo is challenged by Ecuador's Jhegson Mendez, bottom, during their teams' 1-1 draw on November 25. Gakpo scored in the sixth minute for the Dutch. Darko Vojinovic/AP Iranian players celebrate after Roozbeh Cheshmi scored late into second-half stoppage time to break a 0-0 deadlock against Wales on November 25. Iran added another goal to win 2-0. Fadel Senna/AFP/Getty Images Welsh players are dejected as Iran celebrates on Friday. Manu Fernandez/AP A fan holds a Mahsa Amini jersey as a protest before the Iran-Wales match . Recent protests in Iran were sparked by the death of Amini, a 22-year-old woman who died after being detained by Iran's morality police allegedly for not abiding by the country's conservative dress code. Juan Luis Diaz/Quality Sport Images/Getty Images Richarlison scores a spectacular goal during Brazil's 2-0 win over Serbia on November 24. Richarlison scored both of Brazil's goals. Amanda Perobelli/Reuters Brazilian superstar Neymar celebrates the first goal, which he helped create. Kai Pfaffenbach/Reuters Portugal's Cristiano Ronaldo does his trademark goal celebration after converting a penalty against Ghana to become the first man in history to score in five World Cups . It was the first goal of a match that ended in a 3-2 Portugal win. Hassan Ammar/AP Rafael Leão smiles as his shot goes by Ghana goalkeeper Lawrence Ati-Zigi for Portugal's third goal. Glyn Kirk/AFP/Getty Images Ghana's Andre Ayew, right, celebrates with Mohammed Kudus after tying the match at 1-1 shortly after Ronaldo's penalty. Julian Finney/Getty Images Ronaldo slams his penalty into the upper-left corner of the net. Marko Djurica/Reuters Ronaldo makes a face as he celebrates his goal with teammate João Félix. Clive Brunskill/Getty Images Ghana fans cheer prior to the start of the match against Portugal. Hassan Ammar/AP South Korea's Jung Woo-young competes for a ball with Uruguay's Federico Valverde on November 24. Their match ended 0-0. Bernadett Szabo/Reuters South Korean star Son Heung-min wears a protective eye mask against Uruguay after he suffered a fractured eye socket earlier in the month. Kai Pfaffenbach/Reuters Switzerland's Breel Embolo, second from right, shoots past Cameroon's Andre Onana to score the only goal of their match. Claudio Villa/Getty Images Michy Batshuayi celebrates after giving Belgium a 1-0 lead over Canada in their World Cup opener on November 23. That ended up being the only goal of the match. Siphiwe Sibeko/Reuters Belgian players insist there is no foul as Canada's Richie Laryea tumbles over in the box. Molly Darlington/Reuters Canada's Alphonso Davies, left, reacts after missing a penalty early in the first half against Belgium. Ian MacNicol/Getty Images Spain's Ferran Torres, right, shoots past Costa Rican goalkeeper Keylor Navas to give his team a 4-0 lead in their opening match on November 23. Spain went on to win 7-0. Dylan Martinez/Reuters Costa Rica players watch the Spain match from the bench. Patrick Smith/FIFA/Getty Images Media members work at Al Thumama Stadium in Doha for the Spain-Costa Rica match. Peter Cziborra/Reuters Japan midfielder Ritsu Doan, center, is mobbed by teammates after scoring the team's first goal against Germany on November 23. Japan went on to win 2-1. Anne-Christine Poujoulat/AFP/Getty Images Germany's Antonio Rüdiger, top right, is first to a header during the match against Japan. Matthias Schrader/AP Before kickoff against Japan, Germany's starting 11 posed for their team photo with their right hands in front of their mouths. The team's social media feed confirmed that the gesture was designed to protest FIFA's decision to ban the "OneLove" anti-discrimination armband that many European captains had been hoping to wear in Qatar. Visionhaus/Getty Images Morocco's Selim Amallah tries to dribble past Croatia's Marcelo Brozovic, left, and Dejan Lovren during their 0-0 draw on November 23. Croatia was the runner-up in the last World Cup. Darko Vojinovic/AP French players swarm Kylian Mbappé after he scored the team's third goal on November 22. Mbappé was one of the leading stars of the team's World Cup triumph four years ago. Adrian Dennis/AFP/Getty Images French striker Olivier Giroud attempts a shot on goal during a match against Australia on November 22. Giroud scored twice as the defending champions won 4-1. His two goals tied him with Thierry Henry for most international goals by a Frenchman (51). Molly Darlington/Reuters An overhead view of Al Janoub Stadium, in Al Wakrah, Qatar, before the start of the France-Australia match. Pavel Golovkin/AP Poland striker Robert Lewandowski reacts after he missed a second-half penalty in his team's 0-0 draw against Mexico on November 22. Andrej Isakovic/AFP/Getty Images Tunisia's Yassine Meriah stretches to defend a header from Denmark's Andreas Cornelius during their 0-0 draw on November 22. Justin Setterfield/Getty Images Saudi Arabia players celebrate their victory over Argentina on November 22. The 2-1 result was one of the biggest upsets in World Cup history Lionel Hahn/Getty Images Argentina superstar Lionel Messi reacts during the match against Saudi Arabia. Messi opened the scoring with a 10th-minute penalty, but the Saudis rallied with two goals in the second half. Ebrahim Noroozi/AP US forward Timothy Weah celebrates after scoring a first-half goal against Wales on November 21. The match ended 1-1. Matthew Ashton/AMA/Getty Images US fans stand for the national anthem prior to the Wales match. Stu Forster/Getty Images Walker Zimmerman fouls Wales' Gareth Bale in the box, conceding a second-half penalty that Bale would convert to tie the match at 1-1. Pedro Nunes/Reuters Welsh and American players walk onto the field. Elsa/Getty Images The Netherlands' Cody Gakpo celebrates his second-half goal that gave the Dutch a 1-0 lead over Senegal in their World Cup opener on November 21. The Netherlands added a second goal just before the final whistle to win 2-0. Kai Pfaffenbach/Reuters Senegal's Ismaila Sarr eyes the ball during a match against the Netherlands on November 21 Petr David Josek/AP The Senegal-Netherlands match kicks off at Al Thumama Stadium in Doha. Dan Mullan/Getty Images Senegal fans wait for the start of their team's match against the Netherlands. Kai Pfaffenbach/Reuters England players celebrate after Raheem Sterling scored a goal during their match against Iran on November 21. England won 6-2. Frank Augstein/AP Iranian fans hold up a sign that reads "Woman Life Freedom" during the match against England. Anti-government protests have entered a third month back in Iran. Outside the stadium before the game, CNN witnessed a number of Iran supporters wearing protest T-shirts , with slogans such as "Free Iran" or "Rise with the women of Iran." Juan Luis Diaz/Quality Sport Images/Getty Images Labour Party leader Keir Starmer, center, celebrates England's second goal with colleagues David Lammy, left, and Lucy Powell, right, in his parliamentary office at the Palace of Westminster in London. Stefan Rousseau/PA Images/Getty Images Jude Bellingham scores England's first goal against Iran. Peter Cziborra/Reuters England players take a knee before the start of the Iran match. England manager Gareth Southgate confirmed Sunday that the team would be making the symbolic gesture. "We think it's a strong statement that will go around the world for young people in particular to see that inclusivity is very important," Southgate said. Hannah Mckay/Reuters Iranian players line up during the national anthems before the match. They did not sing during their anthem. Marko Djurica/Reuters A light show is displayed over the skyline in Doha on November 20. Alex Grimm/Getty Images Enner Valencia, third from left, celebrates after scoring a second goal against host nation Qatar in the tournament's opening match. Ecuador went on to win 2-0. Kai Pfaffenbach/Reuters Spectators leave Al Bayt Stadium before the end of the Qatar-Ecuador match. No host country had lost a World Cup opener before. Robert Michael/DPA/Picture Alliance/Getty Images Valencia slots a penalty kick past Qatari goalkeeper Saad Al Sheeb to open the scoring in the 16th minute. Robert Michael/DPA/Picture Alliance/Getty Images A fan attends the Qatar-Ecuador match on November 20. Qatar is the first Islamic country to host a World Cup. Ian MacNicol/Getty Images Qatari fans enjoy the pre-match atmosphere at Al Bayt Stadium on November 20. Michael Steele/Getty Images Fans drink beer as they watch the match from a fan zone in Doha. No alcohol is being sold inside the stadiums during the World Cup. Qatar tightly regulates alcohol sales and usage. Francisco Seco/AP A family watches the opening match from their home in Doha. Ibraheem Al Omari/Reuters People watch as fireworks go off before the start of the opening match. Aijaz Rahi/AP People dance in Al Bayt Stadium during the opening ceremony. Pawel Kopczynski/Reuters A girl waves a Qatari flag at a fan zone in Doha. Moises Castillo/AP Actor Morgan Freeman and Qatari YouTuber Ghanim al Muftah take part in the opening ceremony on November 20. Natacha Pisarenko/AP La'eeb, the official mascot of this World Cup , flies during the opening ceremony. La'eeb is an Arabic word meaning super-skilled player. Dylan Martinez/Reuters A performer plays drums during the opening ceremony. Kai Pfaffenbach/Reuters People watch the opening ceremony from a cafe in Baghdad, Iraq. Ahmed Saad/Reuters South Korean singer Jung Kook performs at the opening ceremony. Natacha Pisarenko/AP Dancers light up the ground during the opening ceremony. François-Xavier Mart/AFP/Getty Images A view inside Al Bayt Stadium during the opening ceremony. Amr Abdallah Dalsh/Reuters The best photos of the 2022 World Cup Prev Next

Two migrant workers are reported to have died during this World Cup – 24-year-old John Njue Kibue from Kenya who reportedly fell while on duty at Qatar’s Lusail Stadium and another worker who died at the resort used by Saudi Arabia during the group stages.

And it is difficult to verify how many migrant workers have died as a result of work done on projects connected to the tournament.

The football was compelling, yes, the atmosphere during these four weeks intoxicating, but for some this tournament came at a cost and that must not be forgotten.