1. The rising importance of ballot initiatives — and the fight against them

The 2022 election involved a repudiation of the Supreme Court’s decision to overturn Roe v. Wade. But the fight is in many ways just beginning.

And perhaps the biggest battleground moving forward will be ballot initiatives. Kansas’s primary was the first post-Roe election in which the pro-abortion-rights position won when the question of reproductive rights was put to voters. But it wasn’t the last. ... This isn’t just about abortion; Republicans have also grown weary of progressive ballot-measure victories on issues like marijuana, the minimum wage, expanding Medicaid and reforming redistricting.

2. The subtler shifts in the GOP

Two major changes haven’t gotten enough attention: the party’s turn against big business and against a hawkish foreign policy on issues like Ukraine.

The most telling moment on the latter came when House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.) recently warned that a GOP-controlled House might not sign off on extensive continued funding for Ukraine.

... The GOP’s break from Wall Street has been building over a longer period of time. But it really hit its stride in 2022 as prominent conservatives like Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis (R) made comments attacking “woke” corporations — and even targeting them through legislation — a calling card.

3. Our elections are getting tighter

Swings of less than 1 percent would have changed the results of the 2016 and 2020 presidential contests, as well as the battle for the Senate in 2020 and the House in 2022.

It’s worth asking whether our increased polarization — and fewer truly undecided, persuadable voters — has simply made larger swings more difficult for either party to achieve.

4. Growing accountability for Trump’s frivolous election claims

A bunch of people spent the end of 2020 and the early days of 2021 lying to the American people in ways that ultimately resulted in an attack on the seat of American government. And their lawsuits were routinely and repeatedly rejected because of how baseless they were. ... The legal process has been characteristically slow, but it has resulted in some accountability.



