London CNN —

Snow has blanketed London and large parts of the United Kingdom on Monday, shutting schools, grounding flights and causing widespread disruption across a country struggling through a winter energy crisis.

Britain recorded the coldest day of the year during the early hours of Monday morning, with temperatures as low as minus 15.7 degrees Celsius (4 degrees Fahrenheit) in northern Scotland, according to the Met Office, the UK’s national weather service.

The cold snap left many parts of the country, including London, covered in snow from Sunday evening. The Met Office issued severe weather warnings for some parts of the country.

Motorists were urged to avoid driving in several locations, with some forced to abandon their cars. Many schools were closed. Heathrow, Gatwick and Stansted airports, which all serve the capital, warned of delays and flight cancellations.

Despite the disruption, the arrival of snow two weeks before Christmas brought a festive atmosphere to Britain’s parks and streets.

People walk on a snow-covered pathway near the Tower Bridge in London on Monday, December 12. Henry Nicholls/Reuters Snow-covered offices and buildings, including the Shard skyscraper, sit along the south bank of the river Thames. Daniel Leal/AFP/Getty Images Two red London buses are seen stuck in snow in north London's Muswell Hill. Dave J Hogan/Getty Images A swimmer dips her feet in Serpentine Lake in London's Hyde Park. Henry Nicholls/Reuters People carry sleds up a hill in London's Greenwich Park. The arrival of snow two weeks before Christmas brought a festive atmosphere to the capital's parks and streets. Victoria Jones/PA Images/Getty Images Snow covers rooftops and roads along a canal in east London's Wapping. Daniel Leal/AFP/Getty Images Mounted soldiers ride along the Mall in central London during the changing of The King's Guard. Kirsty Wigglesworth/AP A man jogs along a snow-covered road. Leon Neal/Getty Images Cyclists pass two people riding horses through Hyde Park. Ben Cawthra/Shutterstock A mother pulls a sled with her daughter in north London. Dinendra Haria/LNP/Shutterstock A visitor takes pictures of a snow-covered Regent's Park in London. Chris J. Ratcliffe/Bloomberg/Getty Images A resident walks their dog after low temperatures and overnight snowfall in south London. Richard Baker/In Pictures/Getty Images In pictures: Snow covers London Prev Next

Snowfall is relatively rare in southern England compared to northern Britain and mainland Europe, and Britons frequently gripe about the ill-preparedness of the country’s infrastructure when cold weather hits.

Inflation and an energy crisis have added to the concerns this year, as household bills have soared and people worry about whether they can afford to heat their homes.

People sledging in the snow at Greenwich Park in London on Monday. Victoria Jones/PA Images/Getty Images

National Grid, which manages much of the UK’s energy supply infrastructure, has instructed two coal-fueled power stations to start warming up, in case the cold weather threatens the country’s power network, Britain’s PA Media news agency reported.

The company said it was a “contingency” plan, which aimed to “give the public confidence in Monday’s energy supply,” according to PA.

Customers of some energy suppliers are also being asked to reduce their consumption for two hours on Monday evening, in a pre-planned test being run by National Grid.

Some parts of the country advised motorists to avoid making journeys unless they are essential. Dave J Hogan/Getty Images

Sunday’s snow dump came after several days of cold and icy weather which had already caused tragedy in Solihull, central England.

West Midlands Police said three boys, aged 8, 10 and 11, have died in hospital after falling into a lake on Sunday afternoon. A fourth boy, aged six, remains in critical condition.

“Searches of the lake are continuing as we seek to establish exactly what happened and if anyone else fell into the water,” police said in a statement on Monday.