WASHINGTON — House Republicans are furious that Democrats have obtained and released details about former President Donald Trump’s tax returns.

Rep. Kevin Brady (R-Texas), standing with more than a dozen of his colleagues at a press conference Tuesday, said that if Democrats publicize Trump’s taxes, they will “jeopardize the right of every American to be protected from political targeting by Congress.”

Advertisement

But Brady, the top Republican on the House committee that obtained Trump’s tax information, declined to say that those in his party would not also take advantage of tax disclosure laws to obtain and release private tax information.

“We’re not going to speculate on what our actions will be,” Brady said in response to a reporter’s question. “What we know for certain is the Democrats [are] unleashing a dangerous new weapon that’s going to have severe consequences.”

In fact, Democrats aren’t exactly doing that. Since 1924, certain congressional committees have had the same power as the president to ask the Treasury Department for anybody’s tax returns. Both Republicans and Democrats have used that authority in recent years.

Republicans in 2014 wielded the same disclosure powers that Democrats are using now as part of an investigation into the IRS allegedly mistreating conservative groups seeking tax-exempt status. The Republicans wound up publishing private tax information related to some of the organizations as an attachment to a letter urging the Justice Department to prosecute an IRS official.

Advertisement

In 2019, Democrats asked for six years of Trump’s tax returns under Section 6103 of the tax code. Trump had been the first presidential nominee in decades to refuse to voluntarily release his returns for the sake of transparency with voters about his income.

The Trump administration refused to comply with the demand, prompting Democrats to sue in federal court. The case was only resolved last month when the Supreme Court declined to get involved, paving the way for the returns to be handed over.

On Tuesday, Rep. Richard Neal (D-Mass.) — who chairs the House Ways and Means Committee — called for a special closed committee meeting where lawmakers privately discussed the material they obtained and held a vote on making the information public.

Democrats released two reports providing some details about Trump’s taxes, including several large and questionable deductions that cut his tax liability. And Neal highlighted the fact that the IRS failed to audit Trump for several years of his presidency, even though the agency has said it automatically audits sitting presidents annually.

“There were no audits in a timely manner, and that goes I think for 2017, 2018 and 2019,” Neal said.

Before the meeting, Brady, who is retiring from Congress and won’t chair Ways and Means when Republicans take control of the House next month, declined to say if he thought tax disclosure laws should change. He praised the reforms made in 1976, which prohibited the president from disclosing private tax information but preserved Congress’ ability to do so. The law imposes fines and prison time on any unauthorized tax disclosures.

Advertisement

“This committee will have that conversation later,” Brady told Huffpost.

Republicans may have a conversation about tax disclosure soon. At their first press conference following their victory in the November midterm election, Republicans on the House Oversight and Reform Committee announced they would undertake a multifaceted investigation into the business dealings of Hunter Biden, President Joe Biden’s son.