Roger Stone listens during a press conference on February 25, in Orlando, Florida. (Jabin Botsford/The Washington Post/Getty Images)

Roger Stone’s interview with the Jan. 6 select committee lasted 51 minutes and pleaded with Fifth Amendment for every question that was asked, the panel's transcripts show.

Stone did not comment on anything the panel put in front of him, including photographs, public statements, video clips of interviews, and text messages. He also took the Fifth when asked basic questions like his age.

Stone did not reveal who paid for his private flight from Florida to Washington, DC, in the days before Jan. 6, or who paid for his hotel room at the Willard InterContinental, which is where Stone and other Trump allies set a “war room” on Jan. 6. He also would not confirm which events he was invited to speak at on Jan. 5 and 6, by whom, or if he even attended them at all.

He was previously convicted of lying to Congress during its investigation into Russian meddling in 2016. Prosecutors argued that he lied to protect then-President Donald Trump, who pardoned him in 2020, before leaving office.

Through its questioning, the select committee investigators delved into how the Oath Keepers coordinated to protect Stone when he was in Washington, DC, on Jan. 5 and 6, 2021. A group chat through the encrypted messaging app Signal included Stone and Oath Keepers leader Stewart Rhodes, who has been convicted of seditious conspiracy. Stone wrote, “this group is for all event organizers and VIP speakers who need Oath Keepers PSD or event security on Jan 5/6 so they can talk to me and my top OK team leaders all in one place.” Rhodes later messaged that Kelly Meggs from Florida would be Stone’s protection.

The select committee asked about text exchanges between Stone and “Stop the Steal” rally organizer Ali Alexander, who also was interviewed by the panel, from Jan. 6 where the pair discuss logistics about the rallies that day.

“As I expected, no speaking spot, no VIP entrance for any of my people” Stone said to Alexander at approximately 10:02 a.m. A few hours later, Alexander wrote to stone, “get your ass to the US Capitol” and added “we have a stage & the presidents order.”