Nearly two years after the chaotic, shenanigan-plagued 2020 election, Tesla CEO and new Twitter owner Elon Musk is making the first attempt to hold Big Tech censors responsible for their disgraceful election manipulation tactics.

After a long battle, the mega-billionaire officially acquired his stake in Twitter on Thursday night. His top priority? Firing four of the company’s top executives: CEO Parag Agrawal, CFO Ned Segal, legal and safety executive Vijaya Gadde, and General Counsel Sean Edgett.

By the gnashing of teeth and wailing from Twitter employees, corporate media mouthpieces, and other leftist elites who are quick to defend Big Tech censors, a stranger might think these Twitter heads were unjustly ousted. In reality, Agrawal, Segal, Gadde, and Edgett got what should have come to them two years ago when they knowingly interfered with the 2020 election to help install Joe Biden in the White House.

Twitter doesn’t like to admit who on its staff is ultimately responsible for the suppression of information that makes ruling elites and Democrats look bad, especially ahead of key elections, but it was under the now-fired leadership’s watch that Twitter banned and censored conservatives, Covid-19 jab skeptics, election-integrity supporters, legitimate reporting, and those who told the truth about the sexes.

Oftentimes, Twitter executed this censorship with undeniable arrogance and no remorse. That’s why when Agrawal openly admitted that he believed Twitter’s “role is not to be bound by the First Amendment, but our role is to serve a healthy public conversation,” he wasn’t chided for contradicting the social media company’s supposed commitment to advancing free speech. Instead, he was rewarded with a short-lived spot as CEO and congratulated by Twitter founder Jack Dorsey for his “transformational” work. Agrawal quickly used that power to usher in a new era of partisan crackdowns.

Gadde, who handed down the decision to ban the sitting president, wasn’t criticized for unjustly removing the sitting president and world’s biggest critic of Big Tech. Instead, her attempts to keep Trump and his campaign off of the internet were hailed as heroic, necessary, and moral.

Big Tech censors like Agrawal and Gadde don’t deny that they manipulated the flow of information in the months leading up to the 2020 election. Instead, they wear their partisan censorship like a badge of pride. That’s why Mark Zuckerberg had no problem publicly admitting that Facebook was ready to censor whatever information necessary to preserve the elite establishment’s desired outcome for the 2020 presidential race.

“The FBI basically came to us and spoke to some folks on our team and was like, ‘Hey, just so you know, you should be on high alert. We thought that there was a lot of Russian propaganda in the 2016 election. We have it on notice that basically there’s about to be some kind of dump similar to that,’” Zuckerberg said.

The biggest example of that online tampering came in October 2020, weeks before the election, when the New York Post published a series of reports containing key information about the Biden family business as discovered on Hunter Biden’s personal laptop that he had abandoned.

A story documenting how Hunter leveraged his dad’s position as vice president to broker deals that would financially benefit the Biden family could have changed election outcomes had it been given a chance in the public square, but it wasn’t.

Instead, Big Tech censors (including Twitter execs), likely at the behest of the FBI, blocked the New York Post’s scandalous reporting from spreading and sicced their fake fact-checkers to stomp out every nugget of truth about the Biden family’s corruption.

Taking cues from Twitter and Facebook, corporate media outlets refused to cover the abandoned laptop, which exposed Biden’s lie that he never spoke about business with his son. Emails also demonstrated that Biden likely profited from deals Hunter struck with allies of the Chinese Communist Party.

Musk’s decision to clean house is the first time any of the Big Tech censors have faced true accountability for their perversion of power and abuse of influence to keep Trump from getting re-elected (something tech overlords planned to do since Trump was first elected in 2016).

The likelihood that Twitter’s former executives will stay out of Silicon Valley jobs where they can continue their meddling is low. After all, there are plenty of other Big Tech companies out there that would likely welcome such effective opponents of free speech.

Musk’s commitment to rooting out these opponents, however, is a great example of how to expose and eradicate corruption that taints our nation’s most important democratic process. Musk should continue his quest to punish those who mar Americans’ trust in “free and fair” elections. There are many more offenders worth pursuing.

Jordan Boyd is a staff writer at The Federalist and co-producer of The Federalist Radio Hour. Her work has also been featured in The Daily Wire and Fox News. Jordan graduated from Baylor University where she majored in political science and minored in journalism. Follow her on Twitter @jordanboydtx.