Listen Comment on this story Comment Gift Article Share

Out of the shotgun, Taylor Heinicke took the snap and faked a handoff to Brian Robinson Jr. before turning his eyes downfield, waiting, waiting, waiting and then launching a deep pass to the middle of the end zone, where not a Washington Commanders player was in sight. As the ball sailed, rookie wide receiver Jahan Dotson sprinted into view on a slant route, gaining separation from his defender before jumping to catch the ball in stride.

His 19-yard touchdown reception capped a 91-yard drive and, as in so many games in the past, seemed to signal the start of another Heinicke turnaround. The undrafted and undersized quarterback has made a habit of physics-defying comebacks. That’s why his teammates love him and his coaches need antacids when watching him.

But Sunday night, in a prime-time rematch with the New York Giants that had significant playoff implications, Heinicke’s magic ran dry when it mattered most. After he revived the offense early with that third-quarter scoring drive, his mistakes — and several calls that did not go the Commanders’ way in the final minutes — resulted in a 20-12 loss that dropped their chances of making the playoffs to roughly 40 percent, per projection models.

“We had our opportunities. We put ourselves down there. We missed opportunities, and we can’t do that,” Coach Ron Rivera said. “We talked about that when we were off last week, that the red zone was something we had to be better at — and we didn’t do that.”

Advertisement

The officials had Washington (7-6-1) boiling, but the Commanders’ own mistakes ultimately led to their downfall.

Heinicke was sacked three times and fumbled on two of them. In the second quarter, Giants rookie Kayvon Thibodeaux strip-sacked him, then recovered the ball at the 1-yard line and ran it in for a score that put New York (8-5-1) up 7-3.

“I really think the turning point of the game, the biggest play of the game, was the sack-fumble for a touchdown in the first half,” Heinicke said. “… That’s a tough one.”

In the fourth quarter, Heinicke was sacked in New York’s red zone and, after review, was ruled to have lost possession of the ball before hitting the ground. The Giants went down the field and booted a 50-yard field goal to expand their lead to 20-12 just before the two-minute warning.

Heinicke’s first two words at his postgame news conference: “Pissed off.”

A last-gasp drive got Washington deep in New York territory, but an illegal formation penalty on Terry McLaurin negated a Robinson touchdown run and a fourth-down pass intended for Curtis Samuel in the end zone was broken up under heavy coverage that could have been flagged for pass interference.

Advertisement

“Don’t ask me about the refereeing because I can’t answer the question,” Rivera said.

McLaurin picked his words carefully while talking to reporters in the locker room.

“I’m not trying to get fined. We had our other opportunities,” he said. “For it to come down like that, that’s tough.”

Especially when momentum seemed to shift at the start of the second half. Heinicke’s touchdown pass to Dotson and his 5-for-5 effort on the Commanders’ opening drive of the third quarter seemed to shift the momentum, albeit briefly.

For the first two quarters, Washington’s passing offense struggled to muster much of anything. Heinicke went 7 for 13 for 55 yards and a 64.6 passer rating in the first half. He finished 17 for 29 for 249 yards, one touchdown, zero interceptions and a solid 98.2 rating.

But the list of baffling decisions by Washington grew throughout the first half. On the opening drive, Rivera opted to punt from New York’s 34-yard line after Heinicke took a sack for a loss of three. The Giants returned the punt to the 30 for a mere four-yard change of field position.

“Oh, we got them pinned,” Rivera said of the Commanders’ thought process. “We figured from where we were, we got them pinned.”

Advertisement

Later in the half, the Giants found themselves in a similar position — fourth and nine from the 35-yard line — but converted on a 11-yard completion that set up a three-yard touchdown run by Saquon Barkley, putting New York ahead 14-3.

Before that 97-yard drive by the Giants — the longest by a Washington opponent this year — the Commanders’ defense and special teams had to bail out the offense. The defense forced a three-and-out after the punt from the 34. The defense later stopped the Giants on third and six after the offense sputtered with back-to-back penalties and had to settle for a field goal. And when Heinicke threw into double coverage — twice — to kill a drive, Tress Way dropped a punt at the New York 3-yard line.

Washington was 0 for 5 on third down in the first half. Its running game, led by Robinson, was its engine and accounted for 81 of its 124 net yards in that span. Robinson finished the game with 89 yards on just 12 carries.

Advertisement

Giants quarterback Daniel Jones, who has a history of making light work of the Commanders’ defense, made the most of his depleted offense, guiding it on an 18-play scoring drive before halftime and a 10-play drive in the third quarter that Graham Gano capped with a 50-yard field goal to expand the lead to 17-9.

Heinicke, whose mobility played a significant role in Washington’s turnaround after a 1-4 start, had curiously been conservative on the ground in recent weeks. But Sunday, he picked up a first down on a run in the first quarter, then added another in the fourth when he ran for 14 yards.

But the latter drive sputtered when Antonio Gibson fumbled on second down and, after a recovery, Heinicke missed Dotson on third and nine. Joey Slye, who earlier missed an extra point after a two-point conversion catch was wiped out by a penalty, booted a 51-yard field goal to bring Washington within 17-12.

Advertisement

Darrick Forrest, Washington’s second-year safety whose big plays earned him a starting role, came up with another when he broke up a pass on third and eight, ushering Giants punter Jamie Gillan onto the field. The stop set the stage for some Heinicke magic and, on cue, he launched a rocket down the middle as Dotson sprinted with the Giants’ Jason Pinnock. As the ball neared, Dotson smartly adjusted his body to catch it behind Pinnock for a 61-yard gain.

That drive was poised to end with the go-ahead score, but the Commanders’ red-zone issues resurfaced as Heinicke was sacked on third and four and the ball came loose. Though he was ruled down by contact, a review showed Heinicke did not have possession.

The Giants worked down the field, and Gano booted a field goal to expand their lead to 20-12 just after the two-minute warning.

For a moment, the Commanders seemed out of it, but Gibson broke off a 43-yard kickoff return and Heinicke again found Dotson, this time for 14 yards on an out route. After he almost threw it all away with a near-pick in the end zone, Heinicke scrambled on second down and attempted one of his signature pylon-dive touchdowns. He was stopped a yard shy by Thibodeaux, setting up the third-and-goal play on which McLaurin was penalized to wipe out Robinson’s touchdown run.

Advertisement

On NBC’s broadcast, McLaurin could be seen pointing to the sideline official twice to check his position on the line of scrimmage. After the snap, that official threw a flag.

“I felt like I was on the ball the entire time,” McLaurin said. “... I checked to see if I was good the first time, and he was like, ‘Move up a little bit.’ So when I moved up, I checked to see if I was good, and he said I was good.”

In a pool report, referee John Hussey said he “didn’t see any of that because I’m in the backfield” but was told McLaurin was lined up a yard back at the 1½-yard line.

“I can’t confirm whether the official even saw that or not,” Hussey said when asked about McLaurin pointing to the sideline official, “but he was clearly off the line of scrimmage.”

After the offense moved back five yards, Heinicke fired incomplete. His last attempt, on fourth and goal, again drew the ire of the Commanders when it appeared Samuel was held in the end zone by Giants cornerback Darnay Holmes.

“Everyone’s pissed off right now, and I think it’s going to roll through the week,” Heinicke said. “And that’s a good thing.”

GiftOutline Gift Article