Listen Comment on this story Comment Gift Article Share

ALLENTOWN, Pa. — In the political battleground of Lehigh County, a legal group linked to former president Donald Trump sued to slash the hours of the only around-the-clock ballot drop box, arguing someone could stuff it with fake votes. Vigilantes pledged online to protect it. Election clerks received anonymous letters: “STOP THE ELECTION FRAUD.”

But on this November evening, there are no citizen guards or sneaky fraudsters at the Lehigh County Government Center ballot drop box, just a janitor wiping the glass windows. Leaves skittering across the sidewalk. A husky sniffing grass.

“The rhetoric flying around out there does not match the reality,” said Geoff Brace, the Lehigh County Board of Commissioners chair, a registered Democrat. Investigations nationwide have found no evidence of voter fraud that could have swayed an election, and the same is true here. “It is just a convenience for people,” said Timothy Benyo, the local elections director, a registered Republican. “It is not a fraud factory.”

Ballot boxes were not always controversial. When the Republican-controlled legislature approved broad mail voting in 2019, the top Republican in the Pennsylvania Senate called it “the most significant modernization of our election’s code in decades.” Drop-off voting skyrocketed during the coronavirus pandemic, particularly among Democrats, as Americans sought to avoid crowded polling sites.

Yet ahead of the 2020 election, Trump and right-wing activists claimed without evidence that early voting is rife with cheating, and Republican lawmakers in Pennsylvania pushed to tighten the rules. There are five drop boxes now open in Lehigh County. Signs at the 24-hour voting slot at the Government Center warn that depositing the ballot of anyone else without special permission is illegal.

Advertisement

In the lawsuit a county judge threw out last month, the America First Legal Foundation, led by Stephen Miller, a senior adviser to Trump and former White House chief of staff Mark Meadows, cited an investigation by the district attorney that found 288 instances of people dropping off more than one ballot ahead of the November 2021 election.

Most of the offenders slipped in two, and no one carried more than six. Authorities declined to pursue any charges. “There is no scary ‘ballot harvesting’ with dump trucks full of extra ballots,” said Benyo, the election official. “These are regular people.”

For eight hours over two evenings this week, The Washington Post watched people place their votes in this historically moderate slice of Pennsylvania framed by Appalachian Mountain ridges. They were Democrats, Republicans and Independents. Some had split tickets. No one wanted to deal with the hassle of Election Day lines. Here are five of their stories.

Deborah White

Deborah White arrived with her husband of four decades, Lawrence, as the sun sank over the autumn foliage. She had retired from her admissions job at Lehigh University and was bound to no strict schedule. She wanted to be here, on her own time, on principle. “I am a 68-year-old African American woman,” she said. “There was a time we could not vote. I thought, ‘My God. I have to do this.’”

During the last election, White, a Democrat, used the drop box because it was convenient and she did not want to get covid. Now she was here to exercise a right she felt was under attack. The efforts to shrink early voting hours bothered her. Closing the slot at night, she thought, would just block voters who worked all day. “It is dishonest,” she said, “and it is controlling. They do not want us to do what we are supposed to do.”

Carter Prokesch

Carter Prokesch, a 23-year-old research and development engineer, did not plan to vote at all. Then his father urged him to apply for a mail ballot and make his voice heard. So after work, the self-described “moderate conservative” drove to the Government Center.

Advertisement

He held a split ticket: A vote for Mehmet Oz, the Republican candidate for Senate, and a vote for Josh Shapiro, the Democratic candidate for governor. “Because all of Shapiro’s commercials were not about attacking people,” Prokesch said.

The Republican candidate for governor, Doug Mastriano, chartered buses to the Jan. 6, 2021, rally that erupted in insurrection and vowed to ban abortion without exceptions, suggesting that women who had the procedure should be charged with murder. He campaigned at events promoting antisemitic speculations.

Prokesch was sick of all the fighting. He wanted to be a better Christian and stand by people who treated others with respect. He regretted voting for Trump, he said, after watching the former president fling so many insults. Prokesch and his father were registered Republicans. His mother and twin sister were Democrats. “We do not talk about politics,” he said.

Lax Rode

When Lax Rode voted in the 2020 election, the 38-year-old therapist had to wait in line behind 15 people. Maybe 20. It did not take long, but the voting process was strenuous compared to strolling up to a drop box on a balmy evening. Practically no other humans in sight. Sliding his ballot into the slot. Done.

Advertisement

“I saved time,” he said, grinning, “and time is money in this capitalist country, right?” Rode, who considers himself an Independent and prefers to keep his political decisions private, moved to the United States from India in 2008. He became a naturalized citizen about four years ago and marvels at how politics have changed since then.

He has liberal clients and conservative clients. The gap between them has never seemed wider. He encourages people to stick to the facts. “Back in India we did not have mail ballots,” Rode said. “You would have to go in person. This is one of things I like here. It makes our lives more convenient.”

Mark Stein

Mark Stein, 60, figured the Allentown city center would be quieter on a weeknight. He was right. The history teacher at Muhlenberg College found a parking spot and cast his ballot within minutes. Stein enjoyed the energy of the traditional polls in this swing county, saying that he “never missed an election,” but the tension leading up to the midterms concerns him.

Advertisement

Stein, a Democrat, had heard about armed groups vowing to “monitor” voting sites, including drop boxes. He read that the assailant who attacked the husband of House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) had railed against liberals, Black people and Jews in blog posts.

He thought of the Republican gubernatorial candidate, Mastriano, blasting his opponent, Shapiro, for sending his children to a Jewish day school. (Mastriano has said he was criticizing the school for being “expensive” and “elite” not for any religious reason.) “As an American Jew,” Stein said, “I see a safe space being winnowed away.”

Janice Altieri

Janice Altieri, 58, is a Democrat. Her husband, Joe, 60, is a Republican. They did not want to have to talk to anyone about that. “Around here, a lot of people try to get you to change your vote,” said Janice, a school librarian. “They give you pamphlets,” said Joe, an engineer. “Which are ridiculous!” Janice said. “This way, you do not have to deal with all that.” They could have walked five minutes to the polling place by their house, but the couple preferred the 10-minute drive to the drop box.

Advertisement

Campaigners in Lehigh County are known to ambush voters on Election Day. The pamphlets would probably be extra ridiculous this year, Janice said, considering all the false claims about election fraud. The couple agreed that the 2020 election had not been stolen. Early voting was secure. “I voted straight Democrat,” Janice said, turning to Joe. “I did not even ask you! I do not even know if our votes are matching.”

GiftOutline Gift Article