Seven Republican U.S. senators who slammed former President Trump for suggesting that new censorship revelations warranted a reconsideration of the 2020 presidential election results have no plan to address the First Amendment-violating censorship Trump was reacting to in “The Twitter Files.”

More and more evidence is exposing how our corrupt FBI brazenly violated the Constitution by dictating to social media monopolies what speech to censor from public and private discourse ahead of the 2020 election. Yet GOP senators are more preoccupied with Trump talking about altering the Constitution than they are with the deep state committing actual violations of it.

After revelations uncovered that Twitter colluded with the Biden campaign to censor content in the lead-up to the election and misused its “hacked material policy” to annihilate the Hunter Biden laptop story, Trump posted to Truth Social:

So, with the revelation of MASSIVE & WIDESPREAD FRAUD & DECEPTION in working closely with Big Tech Companies, the DNC, & the Democrat Party, do you throw the Presidential Election Results of 2020 OUT and declare the RIGHTFUL WINNER, or do you have a NEW ELECTION? A Massive Fraud of this type and magnitude allows for the termination of all rules, regulations, and articles, even those found in the Constitution. Our great ‘Founders’ did not want, and would not condone, False & Fraudulent Elections!

Trump clarified his comments on Monday, saying that he does not want to terminate the Constitution, but that there was “‘MASSIVE & WIDESPREAD FRAUD & DECEPTION'” that has been “irrefutably proven in the 2020 Presidential Election” and “steps must be immediately taken to RIGHT THE WRONG.”

Instead of devising a plan to reckon with the 2020 election’s many issues or at least ensure election interference does not occur again, Sens. Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, Mike Rounds and John Thune of South Dakota, John Cornyn of Texas, Roy Blunt of Missouri, Minority Leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, and Mitt Romney of Utah flew into hysterics over the former president’s social media post.

Murkowski decried Trump’s comments as “a betrayal of our oath of office” and “an affront to our Republic.” Cornyn stated that the former president’s remarks were “irresponsible,” and Romney called Trump a “RINO” (“Republican in name only”). Thune condemned the president’s comments and added that it is a “golden opportunity” for 2024 rivals “to create some contrast.”

McConnell, who is responsible for sabotaging GOP chances for a Senate majority, used the controversy to jab at Trump’s bid for the presidency: “Anyone seeking the presidency who thinks that the Constitution could somehow be suspended or not followed, it seems to me would have a very hard time being sworn in as president of the United States.”

The Federalist asked all seven of these Trump-critical senators if they have a plan to remedy the unconstitutional and illegal censorship of voters and news during the 2020 election, or if they have a plan to make sure it doesn’t happen again. Not one of them responded.

The “Twitter Files,” a collection of internal Twitter employee communications revealed to independent journalists Matt Taibbi and Bari Weiss by new Twitter CEO Elon Musk, exposed a coordinated effort to weaponize Twitter — one of the most influential social media platforms for American political discourse — against President Donald Trump ahead of the 2020 election.

In the months leading up to the Big Tech company’s censorship of the Hunter Biden laptop story, Twitter employees were building relationships with Biden’s presidential campaign. “By 2020, requests from connected actors to delete tweets were routine. One executive would write to another: ‘More to review from the Biden team.’ The reply would come back: ‘Handled.’” Taibbi wrote.

The “Twitter Files” revealed how Twitter inappropriately labeled the New York Post’s Hunter Biden laptop story a violation of their “hacked materials policy.” The Twitter team had no proof the laptop story was “hacked,” but the narrative was successfully peddled by corrupt former intelligence heads and partisans in the corporate media who insisted — without evidence — that the story was “Russian disinformation.”

During last Friday’s posting of the “Twitter Files,” Taibbi informed the public that he had “no evidence” Twitter employees were following censorship orders from the government when they shut down the laptop story. But new information suggests a government link after all. In a “Twitter Files Supplemental” on Monday, Taibbi reported that Twitter Deputy General Counsel and former FBI General Counsel Jim Baker was fired by Musk for “Vetting the first batch of ‘Twitter Files’ — without knowledge of new management.”

Before becoming Twitter’s Deputy General Counsel, Baker played an instrumental role in fabricating the Russian collusion hoax, acting as the Clinton campaign’s “go-to, speed-dial contact” for promulgating the now-debunked conspiracy that Trump colluded with the Kremlin. “Clinton campaign lawyer Michael Sussmann picked Baker to give junk intelligence about a purported connection between President Donald Trump and the Russian Alfa Bank,” reports The Federalist’s Tristan Justice.

Taibbi’s “Twitter Files Supplemental” suggests Baker was running interference behind Musk’s back, which could have easily included, for example, protecting his old colleagues at the FBI by removing evidence of their potential role in the censorship.

The idea that the FBI wasn’t involved in the suppression of the story on Twitter seems unlikely given that last week Special Agent Elvis Chan confirmed that the FBI’s Foreign Influence Task Force and Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency met weekly with Big Tech companies to encourage censorship ahead of the 2020 election. We also have confirmation from Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg that Meta took orders from the FBI to suppress the laptop story.

The “Twitter Files” revealed that Twitter suppressed day-to-day content at the behest of the Biden campaign, and it eliminated the biggest story in the lead-up to the 2020 election (potentially with FBI input) using the false, Democrat-contrived accusation that the story was “Russian disinformation.” This kind of election interference operation only becomes more influential when Election Day is turned into election season, as significant numbers of voters may cast their votes before unjustly suppressed information reaches their ears.

Polls show that 1 in 6 Biden voters would have changed their minds if they’d known about the several throttled news stories that were unfavorable to Biden, including the story about his son’s laptop. Unfortunately, these seven prominent GOP Republican senators, including Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, would rather criticize Trump than address Big Tech and FBI election interference and devise a plan for how to ensure election integrity in the future.

Evita Duffy is a staff writer to The Federalist and the co-founder of the Chicago Thinker. She loves the Midwest, lumberjack sports, writing, and her family. Follow her on Twitter at @evitaduffy_1 or contact her at evita@thefederalist.com.