Imagine saying men can’t be lesbians — and facing prison time for it. One lesbian artist in Norway is in just such a predicament, facing up to three years in prison for saying men cannot become lesbians.

In a Facebook post on Oct. 1, Tonje Gjevjon wrote, “It’s just as impossible for men to become lesbian as it is for men to become pregnant. Men are men regardless of their sexual fetishes.” Her post came in response to Norwegian transgender activist Christine Jentoft, a man who claims to be a lesbian and a mom. On Nov. 17, Gjevjon was notified she was under criminal investigation for hate speech.

Thanks to Norway’s newly-revised (as of 2020) hate speech legislation, which now includes “gender identity or gender expression” in its protected categories, Gjevjon could go to prison for three years over her Facebook post if found guilty.

In another comment directed at Jentoft, Norwegian feminist Christina Ellingsen said men cannot be mothers. Ellingsen is also under police investigation and faces the same potential punishment as Gjevjon.

You’d think laying claim to the letter “L” in LGBT would make one immune to the wrath of the alphabet lobby, but this is not enough. One must subscribe totally to its dogma (particularly where the T’s are concerned) or risk being labeled a TERF, or trans-exclusionary radical feminist, and getting canceled — or possibly thrown in jail.

Therein lies the problem. Women — especially lesbians — cannot expect the LGBT activist crowd (or so-called “allies”) ever to come to their defense. The LGBT movement, much like the sexual revolution, was never really for the liberation or sexual freedom of women. Its logical end has always been about giving power to perversion, rejecting basic biological reality, and trampling the rights of women.

Take University of Pennsylvania swimmer Lia Thomas, a man who purports to be a woman and competes for Penn’s woman’s swim team. In March, he won the 500-yard freestyle for the NCAA championships, pushing out biological women from their well-earned first and second places and depriving another woman of taking a stand on the podium. Or consider the so-called “gender fluid” male high school student who sexually assaulted a ninth-grade girl in a school bathroom (he was reportedly wearing a skirt) in Loudoun County, Virginia. As a result of the incident, the boy was transferred to another school where he allegedly sexually assaulted another female student.

In the case of both Thomas and the Loudoun County student, women were made to comply with the demands of men or else risk social censure — and look where that coercion and compliance have gotten us. Take the bathroom “debate” in the United States. Many states and hundreds of municipalities allow men to use women’s public bathroom facilities, which has also affected school locker rooms. Men have also been granted access to plenty of other traditional, female-only spaces such as spas, public pools, sports competitions, and even prison facilities. At a Los Angeles spa, a registered sex offender allegedly exposed himself to a group of women, including an underage girl, and a transgender-identifying Rikers inmate raped a female prisoner in the shower earlier this year.

Compliance is not going very well, and it’s hurrying in an abolition of women. Kudos to the brave Norwegian women for breaking from the alphabet pack and taking a stand, even if it costs them.

Victoria Marshall is a staff writer at The Federalist. Her writing has been featured in the New York Post, National Review, and Townhall. She graduated from Hillsdale College in May 2021 with a major in politics and a minor in journalism. Follow her on Twitter @vemrshll.