After a long and draining 2022, the Christmas season has finally arrived! With bells ringing, Michael Bublé on the radio, and the smell of pine in the air, it is indeed the “Most Wonderful Time of the Year.”

Although Christmas offers a chance to unwind and spend quality time with our closest friends and family, it’s also a time to laugh. And what better way to put smiles on faces than to run through a list of some of the political world’s biggest troublemakers who found themselves on Santa’s Naughty List this year?

1. Anthony Fauci

If one of Santa’s elves went rogue and ruined Christmas for the whole world, his name would probably be Anthony Fauci.

Over the past year, the infectious disease “expert” has given so much garbage commentary wrapped up as “The Science,” it’s hard to keep track of exactly how many lies he’s told. Despite the long-term unknowns of giving low-risk children the Covid jab (and the shot’s potential side effects), for instance, Fauci has gone full steam ahead in pimping the mRNA injections for minors under 5, calling them “effective and safe.”

He also recently got busted in a legal deposition for previously flip-flopping on the efficacy of face masks in stopping viral transmission, as well as his prior work in smearing doctors who disagreed with his Covid approach.

Maybe if we’re lucky, Santa will mistake Tony for an elf and take him back to the North Pole.

2. Joe Biden

There’s really way too much you could say about Biden. Whether it’s the decimation of America’s energy industry, skyrocketing inflation, a wide-open southern border, or displaying weakness to our enemies, America’s commander-in-chief has done more to wreck the country in less than two years than Barack Obama did in eight. Even as the nation crumbles around his feet, Biden can’t be bothered to care, instead using the time he’s not napping to chow down on some ice cream.

Given Biden’s tendency to sniff children’s hair, you might want to check that the man coming down your chimney this Christmas Eve is in fact Santa and not the guy living at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue.

3. Justin Trudeau

If there’s anyone who deserves coal in his stocking, it’s climate alarmist and Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau. After forcing Canadian truckers to get the experimental Covid jab earlier this year, Trudeau not only smeared demonstrators protesting the mandate as racist, but he proceeded to use overreaching government powers to crush the protests.

Coupled with his climate war on Canadian farmers and support for Roe v. Wade, the young Fidel Castro look-alike definitely doesn’t deserve any presents under the tree.

4. Mitch McConnell

There’s probably no one more responsible for Democrats maintaining control of the Senate than GOP Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell. After trashing Republican candidates who wouldn’t support his bid for leadership, McConnell worked to undercut said candidates in the general election, pulling millions in ad spending from battlegrounds such as Arizona and redirecting it toward safe-Republican races such as Alaska to save establishment incumbents.

Additionally, McConnell did nothing to prevent his party from helping Senate Democrats advance numerous policy initiatives over the past year, such as gun control, deriding the meaning of marriage, and approving Biden’s judicial nominees.

5. Taylor Lorenz

Just as “democracy dies in darkness” at The Washington Post, so too does anonymity. In the spring, Post reporter Taylor Lorenz — a grown woman whose social media feed reads like that of a teenage girl’s — doxxed the woman behind the viral Libs of TikTok Twitter account.

In her bid to “expose” the person reposting publicly available TikTok videos of crazed leftist educators, Lorenz went out of her way to peddle antisemitic tropes by portraying the woman as a “powerful” Orthodox Jew who is helping “shap[e]” the media. Her article also linked to the woman’s real estate license, “including [her] name, real estate license number, and physical address.”

6. Merrick Garland

Once cast as a level-headed jurist by legacy media, Merrick Garland has done more to politicize the DOJ than any attorney general in modern American history. As if standing idle while left-wing anarchists harassed (and in one case, tried to assassinate) Supreme Court justices at their homes wasn’t bad enough, Garland’s DOJ orchestrated an unprecedented raid on the estate of a former president and current leader of the opposing political party.

Add in his habit of using the DOJ to issue politicized hot takes on Supreme Court decisions he disagrees with, and the only gift Garland should get this Christmas is a pink slip.

7. Rachel Levine

If you’re looking for last-minute gift ideas for your kids this year, I wouldn’t recommend asking Assistant Health Secretary Rachel Levine. Considering his advocation for laws that “support and empower” minors to “get gender affirmation treatment” (which is really just a euphemism for irreversible interventions such as mutilative surgeries), he’d probably tell you to get them puberty blockers or some other chemical that will destroy your children’s bodies.

8. Alejandro Mayorkas

If there were an award for “Worst Employee of the Year,” it’d go to Department of Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas. Over the past year, the guy has done virtually nothing to secure the U.S. southern border, leading to a record 2.3 million apprehensions during the 2022 fiscal year.

Despite his insistence that “the border is secure,” Mayorkas can’t hide the overwhelming chaos experienced by Border Patrol agents on a daily basis. In the spirit of Christmas giving, maybe Mayorkas should do the country a solid and give us his resignation.

9. Sam Bankman-Fried

Just in time for the holidays, it was revealed that Democrat mega-donor Sam Bankman-Fried’s cryptocurrency exchange company, FTX, was essentially one giant Ponzi scheme. With FTX forced to declare bankruptcy, up to a million investors worldwide were left defrauded of billions of dollars.

I suppose nothing says, “Merry Christmas!” quite like scamming hundreds of thousands of people out of money.

10. Volodymyr Zelensky

It’s not every day a country gets invaded, but when it happens, you’d like to think the nation’s political leaders would prioritize the rights and well-being of their people. But Ukraine President Volodymyr Zelensky has taken a different approach.

Since Russia invaded Ukraine earlier this year, Zelensky has used the war as a cover to target press freedoms, as well as disband an opposing political party. Instead of acting like the leader of a democracy, Zelensky has governed more like the man responsible for invading his nation: Vladimir Putin.

And while it’s understandable for Zelensky to seek assistance from the international community in Ukraine’s fight for sovereignty, it’s completely insane to use every available opportunity to try to drag the West into a nuclear-armed conflict with Russia that would lead to more destruction and loss of life.

Shawn Fleetwood is a Staff Writer for The Federalist and a graduate of the University of Mary Washington. He also serves as a state content writer for Convention of States Action and his work has been featured in numerous outlets, including RealClearPolitics, RealClearHealth, and Conservative Review. Follow him on Twitter @ShawnFleetwood