Think high-school-junior-to-Democrat-voter pipeline. That’s the model for this left-wing nonprofit’s latest Democrat get-out-the-vote scheme.

In a fundraising email to its supporters, VoteAmerica — a left-wing nonprofit that focuses on voter registration and turnout — writes that because 50 percent of high school students take either the SAT or ACT, it’s partnering with high schools across the country to register students to vote when they sign up for standardized testing.

“We want students to be directed to futurevoter.com, where they can pledge to register to vote as soon as they turn 18,” the email reads. “Students who join the FutureVoter initiative will receive automated text message voter registration prompts as soon as they turn 18 and will experience comprehensive get-out-the-vote campaigns over their first three elections.”

Simply put: by signing underage students up to register to vote, FutureVoter and its parent company, VoteAmerica, can send them Democrat Party-specific prompts and groom them into becoming future Democrat voters. While VoteAmerica claims it’s nonpartisan, its fundraising page is serviced by ActBlue Charities, a “pass-through organization created to facilitate donations to left-of-center 501(c)(3) nonprofits.” ActBlue itself is a left-wing PAC that funnels millions of dollars into left-wing causes and Democrat campaigns every year through its fundraising platforms.

Make no mistake about what kind of voter FutureVoter wishes to cultivate. Gen Z helped pull many Democrat candidates to the finish line this past midterm cycle, with about two-thirds of them backing Democrat House candidates (27 percent of Americans aged 18-29 cast votes). While Democrats don’t quite have Gen Z or millennials in the bag (in fact, a growing percentage of young people are supporting the Republican Party), schemes like lowering the voting age or fronting as CollegeBoard itself are all part of the larger Democrat Party plan to cinch the youth vote.

Never mind that a third of high school seniors fail to attain a basic understanding of civics, or that high school (and for that matter, college) graduates are coming out of school woefully uneducated. This is the perfect kind of voting bloc for Democrat GOTV efforts: one that can be effectively propagandized for years to come (according to VoteAmerica, “a young person who casts a ballot in three consecutive elections will become a lifelong consistent voter”). And on this new voting bloc rests the future of the country.

FutureVoter is just one small piece of the puzzle that is Democrats’ complicated network of 501(c)(3) nonprofit “charities” that “stack voter rolls in their favor.” Disgraced FTX founder Sam Bankman-Fried’s mother is in charge of one such foundation that funnels millions in tax-exempt cash from Silicon Valley moguls into groups that cherrypick and register potential Democrat voters. The Center for Tech and Civic Life is another one. If Republicans hope to mitigate the effects of these left-wing nonprofit powerhouses (and want a chance at winning elections), they must create their own.

VoteAmerica did not respond to The Federalist’s request for comment.

Victoria Marshall is a staff writer at The Federalist. Her writing has been featured in the New York Post, National Review, and Townhall. She graduated from Hillsdale College in May 2021 with a major in politics and a minor in journalism. Follow her on Twitter @vemrshll.